# Selected poems from the English Project Gutenberg Corpus (see https://github.com/tnhaider/metrical-tagging-in-the-wild/tree/main)
# 100 poems in iambic pentameter for exp. 3a

<513>
A little saint best fits a little shrine ,
A little prop best fits a little vine :
As my small cruse best fits my little wine .
A little seed best fits a little soil ,
A little trade best fits a little toil :
As my small jar best fits my little oil .
A little bin best fits a little bread ,
A little garland fits a little head :
As my small stuff best fits my little shed .
A little hearth best fits a little fire ,
A little chapel fits a little choir :
As my small bell best fits my little spire .
A little stream best fits a little boat ,
A little lead best fits a little float :
As my small pipe best fits my little note .
A little meat best fits a little belly ,
As sweetly , lady , give me leave to tell ye ,
This little pipkin fits this little jelly .
<1170>
Base man ! and couldst thou think Cato alone
Wants courage to be dry ? and but him , none ?
Look 'd I so soft ? breath 'd I such base desires ,
Not proof against this Lybic sun 's weak fires ?
That shame and plague on thee more justly lie !
To drink alone , when all our troops are dry .
For with brave rage he flung it on the sand ,
And the spilt draught suffic 'd each thirsty band
<1288>
TWO lawyers to their cause so well adhered ,
A country justice quite confused appeared ,
By them the facts were rendered so obscure
With which the truth remained he was not sure .
At length , completely tired , two straws he sought
Of diff'rent lengths , and to the parties brought .
These in his hand he held :— the plaintiff drew
( So fate decreed ) the shortest of the two .
On this the other homeward took his way ,
To boast how nicely he had gained the day .
THE bench complained : the magistrate replied
Do n't blame I pray — ‘ tis nothing new I 've tried ;
Courts often judge at hazard in the law ,
Without deciding by the longest straw .
<2223>
It may be that your eyes deceive you slightly ;
Naught but a plain black poodle do I see .
It seems to me that with enchanted cunning
He snares our feet , some future chain to bind .
<4305>
In ruin are the spacious , splendid halls
With frozen forest of white columns where
The Tartar Khan his palace builded fair ,
Where loneliest the shrilling cricket calls .
The ivy blackens over shining walls
Enscribing in gigantic letters there
Some curse Belshazzar-like : Beware ! Beware !—
Then black as crepe from crested columns falls .
Within the burnished banquet room there sings
The fountain of the harem pure and clear ,
Just as of old it sang in twilights drear .
But whither love and fame speed — on what wings ?
When all things else must perish these endure !
Yet both are gone ! The fountain ripples pure .
<6402>
How kindly thou my yearning then didst still
With gentle words , enthralling me to thee .
In truth methought I read thy whispers mild
Wherewith thou lovingly my soul didst fill ,
E'en to myself for aye ennobling me .
<6404>
But we are on the proper road alone !
If gladly is to thaw the frozen soul ,
The fire of love must aye be kept alive .
<9308>
‘ Tis thought Odysseus when the strife was o'er
With all the waves and wars , a weary while ,
Grew restless in his disenchanted isle ,
And still would watch the sunset , from the shore ,
Go down the ways of gold , and evermore
His sad heart followed after , mile on mile ,
Back to the Goddess of the magic wile ,
Calypso , and the love that was of yore .
Thou too , thy haven gained , must turn thee yet
To look across the sad and stormy space ,
Years of a youth as bitter as the sea ,
Ah , with a heavy heart , and eyelids wet ,
Because , within a fair forsaken place
The life that might have been is lost to thee .
<10099>
Poor trembling soul within this frame of clay ,
That vainly questioneth , wouldst fain essay
The problem that nor time nor man may solve ,
Around which cycles evermore revolve !
Not till the light upon thy quest is born ,
That only beams in an immortal morn ,
Shalt thou be satisfied , thy fears allayed ,
And , freed from earth , a new creation made !
<10464>
This is not then thy grief , to see me die ?
Die shalt thou not , yet give thy blood to death .
<10467>
Firm let it stand whatever bleed or fall .
O Gods , that I should say it shall and weep .
<10469>
What stain is on them for thy tears to cleanse ?
A stain of blood unpurgeable with tears .
<14203>
O day , O day , is it a little thing
That thou so long unto thy life must cling ,
Because I gave thee such a welcoming ?
I called thee king of all felicity ,
I praised thee that thou broughtest joy so nigh ;
Thine hours are turned to years , thou wilt not die ;
O day so longed for , would that thou wert gone !
<14206>
Why should I name the land across the sea
Wherein I first took hold on misery ?
Why should I name the land that flees from me ?
Let me depart , since ye are happy here .
<14207>
What wilt thou do within the desert place
Whereto thou turnest now thy careful face ?
Stay but a while to tell us of thy case .
Abide ! abide ! for we are happy here .
<14208>
What , nigh the journey 's end shall I abide ,
When in the waste mine own love wanders wide ,
When from all men for me she still doth hide ?
Let me depart , since ye are happy here .
<14209>
Nay , nay ; but rather she forgetteth thee ,
To sit upon the shore of some warm sea ,
Or in green gardens where sweet fountains be .
Abide ! abide ! for we are happy here .
<14210>
Will ye then keep me from the wilderness ,
Where I at least , alone with my distress ,
The quiet land of changing dreams may bless ?
Let me depart , since ye are happy here .
<14212>
Ah ! with your sweet eyes shorten not the day ,
Nor let your gentle hands my journey stay !
Perchance love is not wholly cast away .
Let me depart , since ye are happy here .
<14213>
Pluck love away as thou wouldst pluck a thorn
From out thy flesh ; for why shouldst thou be born
To bear a life so wasted and forlorn ?
Abide ! abide ! for we are happy here .
<14215>
Dost thou believe that this shall ever be ,
That in our land no face thou e'er shalt see ,
No voice thou e'er shalt hear to gladden thee ?
Abide ! abide ! for we are happy here .
<14216>
No longer do I know of good or bad ,
I have forgotten that I once was glad ;
I do but chase a dream that I have had .
Let me depart , since ye are happy here .
<14219>
We mock thee not . Hast thou not heard of those
Whose faithful love the loved heart holds so close ,
That death must wait till one word lets it loose ?
Abide ! abide ! for we are happy here .
<14221>
Come back ! like such a singer is the wind ,
As to a sad tune sings fair words and kind ,
That he with happy tears all eyes may blind !
Abide ! abide ! for we are happy here .
<14223>
Oh , no ! not far thou heardest her , but nigh ;
Nigh , ‘ twixt the waste 's edge and the darkling sky .
Turn back again , too soon it is to die .
Abide ! a little while be happy here .
<15159>
No , no , the falling blossom is no sign
Of loveliness destroy 'd and sorrow mute ;
The blossom sheds its loveliness divine ; -
Its mission is to prophecy the fruit .
Nor is the day of love for ever dead ,
When young enchantment and romance are gone ;
The veil is drawn , but all the future dread
Is lightened by the finger of the dawn .
Love moves with life along a darker way ,
They cast a shadow and they call it death :
But rich is the fulfilment of their day ;
The purer passion and the firmer faith .
<20181>
When you and I have played the little hour ,
Have seen the tall subaltern Life to Death
Yield up his sword ; and , smiling , draw the breath ,
The first long breath of freedom ; when the flower
Of Recompense has fluttered to our feet ,
As to an actor 's ; and the curtain down ,
We turn to face each other all alone —
Alone , we two , who never yet did meet ,
Alone , and absolute , and free : oh , then ,
Oh , then , most dear , how shall be told the tale ?
Clasped hands , pressed lips , and so clasped hands again ;
No words . But as the proud wind fills the sail ,
My love to yours shall reach , then one deep moan
Of joy ; and then our infinite Alone .
<20948>
The sea is just a cradle wide and deep ,—
A cradle that the moon rocks to and fro ;
What peace they find who there fall fast asleep ,
What lovely dreams ,— ‘ Tis not for us to know .
But God hath sent the angel of the sea
To sing to them an endless lullaby ;
And that they may not dread night 's mystery ,
He lights for them the candles of the sky .
They are infolded by the silken waves ,
And wrapped in shining blue , and emerald green ;
They drift through opalescent ocean caves ,
That only God Himself hath ever seen .
The great salt wind that no man holds in thrall ,
Touches them softly , as it passes by ;—
I think the silver sea gulls know them all ,
And greet them with their lonely tender cry .
For but a little little round of years ,
The sweet sun-sprinkled foam will be their bed ,
And they will slumber — hushed from any fears —
To waken , when the sea gives up her dead .
<21135>
AS I read over old John Dryden ’ s verse ,
The rhymes of men like William Blake , and Gay ,
The stuff that helped fill Edmund Waller ’ s purse ,
And that which placed on Marvell ’ s brow the bay ,
It doth appear to me that in those times
The Muses quaffed not sparkling wine , but grog ,
And that to grow immortal through one ’ s rhymes
Was ’ bout as hard as falling off a log .
<21142>
I KNEW a man who died in days of yore ,
To whom no monument is like to rise ;
And yet there never lived a mortal more
Deserving of a shaft to pierce the skies .
His chiefest wish strong friendships was to make ;
He cared but little for this poor world ’ s pelf ;
He shared his joys with every one who ’ d take ,
And kept his sorrows strictly to himself .
<21880>
I BURIED Joy ; and early to the tomb
I came to weep — so sorrowful was I
Who had not dreamed that Joy , my Joy , could die .
I turned away , and by my side stood Joy
All glorified — ah , so ashamed was I
Who dared to dream that Joy , my Joy , could die !
<21902>
I GIVE you Life , O child , a garden fair ;
I give you Love , a rose that blossoms there —
I give a day to pluck it and to wear !
I give you Death , O child — a boon more great —
That , when your Rose has withered and ‘ tis late ,
You may pass out and , smiling , close the gate !
<22002>
From out the west , where darkling storm-clouds float ,
The ‘ waking wind pipes soft its rising note .
From out the west , o'erhung with fringes grey ,
The wind preludes with sighs its roundelay ,
Then blowing , singing , piping , laughing loud ,
It scurries on before the grey storm-cloud ;
Across the hollow and along the hill
It whips and whirls among the maples , till
With boughs upbent , and green of leaves blown wide ,
The silver shines upon their underside .
A gusty freshening of humid air ,
With showers laden , and with fragrance rare ;
And now a little sprinkle , with a dash
Of great cool drops that fall with sudden splash ;
Then over field and hollow , grass and grain ,
The loud , crisp whiteness of the nearing rain .
<22070>
He lives his lonely life , and when he dies
A thousand hearts maybe will utter sighs ;
Because they liked his songs , and now their bird
Sleeps with his head beneath his wing , unheard .
But what kind hand will tend his grave , and bring
Those blossoms there , of which he used to sing ?
Who 'll kiss his mound , and wish the time would come
To lie with him inside that silent tomb ?
And who 'll forget the dreamer 's skill , and shed
A tear because a loving heart is dead ?
Heigh ho for gossip then , and common sighs —
And let his death bring tears in no one 's eyes .
<22172>
With heart pain and with quiver of the lip ,
I bid my boy “ good bye , ” with words of cheer .
I hug him to my heart to hide a tear ,
And hold him close so long , that no tongue-slip
Could more betray my bodings for his ship ,
Or troop , when landed . It is when I hear
My daughters ’ voices , that I shame off fear
And take my boy 's both hands with firmest grip .
Go , son , and , though with thy young life ‘ tis blown ,
Blare thou the Bugle , rousing man to sweep
The monsters back to Hell 's profoundest deep ,
Where , mocking Spring and Sun-rise , they have grown
On longings for the sea , the world must weep
When , from its heart , the hope of Peace has flown .
<22441>
It is too late to part . I dreamed a dream
That love had loosed me , that no more your name
Should vex my soul , for very pride and shame
I hid you out of mind ; I said , The stream
Has grown too wide between us , it would seem
To sunder even memory . Your fame
Rang hollow on my ear , and then you came
And love laughed for the lie he would redeem .
It is too late . Love will not let me go .
The bare suns burn me , and the strong winds blow ;
I take them fearlessly , for I am wise
At last ; for being yours I must be brave ,
Tho ’ you give nothing , still am I your slave ,
The light within my heart your eyes , your eyes .
<23076>
Our deeds avail not ; and our dreams are thrust
Into the dark and wither from the sky .
We live in duress , and to sweetness die ;
And lo ! our guerdon is the world 's distrust .
Yet have we dreamt of judgment that is just ,
And seen a splendour trailing from on high ;
From mean abortion mounts our piteous cry :
“ Out of the dust , O Christ ! out of the dust ! ”
We are as leaves within the winter gale ,
And are through tribulation darkly driven ;
And all the promise that the prime hath given
Is as faint smoke before the winds that wail .
Wan from the drowning pools of bitter bale
Our futile faces front the hush of heaven !
<23756>
The leaf that ripens only in the sun
Is dull and shrivelled ere its race is run .
The leaf that makes a carnival of death
Must tremble first before the north wind 's breath .
The life that neither grief nor burden knows
Is dwarfed in sympathy before its close .
The life that grows majestic with the years
Must taste the bitter tonic found in tears .
<23858>
We meet again beyond the barren past ,
Beyond the pride , the sorrows and the tears ;
And yearnings leave the strife and hate of years
To flood our souls with perfect peace at last !
Our hearts forget the wrong so deep and vast ,
The wounding words and all the cruel woe ,
Till joy is all our bounding bosoms know ,
And life is glad with happiness at last .
Love , deathless and forgiving , crowns with bays
The future and our hopes , as full of grace ,
As youth had fondly dreamed in other days ,
When first we knew how sweet was her embrace .
God 's endless purpose guides the feet of men ;
Beyond our pride we meet in love again !
<24560>
In books I read , how men have lived and died ,
With hopeless love deep in their bosoms hidden .
While she for whom they long in secret sighed ,
Went on her way , nor guessed this flame unbidden .
In real life , I never chanced to see
The woman who was loved , and did not know it ,
And observation proves this fact to me :
No man can love a woman and not show it .
<24763>
However skilled and strong art thou , my foe ,
However fierce is thy relentless hate ,
Though firm thy hand , and strong thy aim , and straight
Thy poisoned arrow leaves the bended bow ,
To pierce the target of my heart , ah ! know
I am the master yet of my own fate .
Thou canst not rob me of my best estate ,
Though fortune , fame , and friends , yea , love shall go .
<24798>
Yea ! I regret those hours I wasted on
The poor procession that preceded thee .
Hadst thou come first , then all the added wealth
Of one long day of loving thee were mine -
A boundless fortune squandered . Though I live
To three score years and ten , as I do hope ,
In wedded love beside thee , that one day
Was filched from me and cannot be restored .
<24833>
Look in the eyes of trouble with a smile ,
Extend your hand and do not be afraid .
‘ Tis but a friend who comes to masquerade .
And test your faith and courage for awhile .
Fly , and he follows fast with threat and jeer .
Shrink , and he deals hard blow on stinging blow ,
But bid him welcome as a friend , and lo !
The jest is off — the masque will disappear .
<25146>
Though pent in stony streets , ‘ tis joy to know ,
‘ Tis joy , although we breathe a fainter air ,
The spirit of those places far and fair
That we have loved , abides ; and fern-scents flow
Out of the wood 's heart still , and shadows grow
Long on remembered roads as warm days wear ;
And still the dark wild water , in its lair ,
The narrow chasm , stirs blindly to and fro .
Delight is in the sea-gull 's dancing wings ,
And sunshine wakes to rose the ruddy hue
Of rocks ; and from her tall wind-slanted stem
A soft bright plume the goldenrod outflings
Along the breeze , above a sea whose blue
Is like the light that kindles through a gem .
<25331>
This was the end love made ,— the hard-drawn breath ,
The last long sigh that ever man sighs here ;
And then for us , the great unanswered fear ,
Will love live on ,— the other side of death ?
Only a year , and I had hoped to spend
A life of pleasant communing , to be
A kindred spirit holding fast to thee ,
We never thought that love had such an end .
This was the end love made , for our delight ,
For one sweet year he cannot take away ;—
Those tapers burning in the dim half-light ,
Those kneeling women with a cross that pray ,
And there , beneath green leaves and lilies white ,
Beyond the reach of love , our loved one lay .
<25472>
I am more tremulous than shaken reeds ,
And love has made me like the river water .
Thy voice is as the hill-wind over me ,
And all my changing heart gives heed , my lover .
Before thy least lost murmur I must sigh , 
Or gladden with thee as the sun-path glitters .
<26079>
I know a garden where the lilies gleam ,
And one who lingers in the sunshine there ;
She is than white-stoled lily far more fair ,
And oh , her eyes are heaven-lit with dream .
I know a garret , cold and dark and drear ,
And one who toils and toils with tireless pen ,
Until his brave , sad eyes grow weary — then
He seeks the stars , pale , silent as a seer .
And ah , it 's strange , for desolate and dim
Between these two there rolls an ocean wide ;
Yet he is in the garden by her side ,
And she is in the garret there with him .
<26416>
The night is sweet : thy breath is in the air ,
I feel it on my face ; thy tender eyes
Look love upon me from yon starry skies !
They bring to me , those glancing moonbeams fair ,
The shine and ripple of thy silken hair .
And in the silent whispers and the sighs
That from the throbbing heart of Nature rise ,
I hear thee , feel thee ,— own thy presence there .
Ah , fond deceit !— too soon the heart , unblest ,
Unsated , turns from these illusive charms
Back to the haunting dream of heav'n once known :
It pines for those soft eyes , that throbbing breast ,
Those sweet life-giving lips , those circling arms —
The breath , the touch , the warmth of Beauty flown .
<26441>
O Farmer , independentest of all
Mankind art thou ! I know , because , last year
I spent my whole vacation , pretty near ,
On Uncle Eben 's farm , and though I 'm small ,
I hoed the corn and beans , and helped him haul
And stack his hay . I'dst work until I'dst fear
I'dst just drop down and end my sad career
Before they'dst give the welcome dinner call .
My uncle dost not weigh his words with care ,
For once he told me that I wast a shirk ;
But I wouldst rather breathe the country air
Than be a shut-in office-boy or clerk ;
For I found out whilst visitin ’ out there
That I like farmin ’ , but I hate farm work .
<26845>
Long years ago , within a distant clime ,
Ere Love had touched me with his wand sublime ,
I dreamed of one to make my life 's calm May
The panting passion of a summer 's day .
And ever since , in almost sad suspense ,
I have been waiting with a soul intense
To greet and take unto myself the beams ,
Of her , my star , the lady of my dreams .
O Love , still longed and looked for , come to me ,
Be thy far home by mountain , vale , or sea .
My yearning heart may never find its rest
Until thou liest rapt upon my breast .
The wind may bring its perfume from the south ,
Is it so sweet as breath from my love 's mouth ?
Oh , naught that surely is , and naught that seems
May turn me from the lady of my dreams .
<27280>
So quietly I seem to sit apart ;
I think she does not know or guess at all ,
How dear this certain hour to my old heart ,
When in our quiet street the shadows fall .
She leans and listens at the little gate .
I sit so still , not any eye might see
How watchfully before her there I wait
For that one step that brings my world to me .
She does not know that long before they meet
( So eagerly must go a love athirst ) ,
My heart outstrips the flying of her feet ,
And meets and greets him first — and greets him first .
<28841>
Unless you come while still the world is green ,
A place of birds and the blue dreaming sea ,
In vain has all the singing summer been ,
Unless you come , and share it all with me .
Ah ! come , ere August flames its heart away ,
Ere , like a golden widow , autumn goes
Across the woodlands , sad with thoughts of May ,
An aster in her bosom for a rose .
<29270>
When first upon my brow I felt your kiss ,
A sudden splendour filled me , like the ray
That promptly runs to crown the hills with bliss
Of purple dawn before the golden day ,
And ends the gloom it crosses at one leap .
My brow was not unworthy your caress ;
For some foreboding joy had bade me keep
From all affront the place your lips would bless .
Yet when your mouth upon my mouth did lay
The royal touch , no rapture made me thrill ,
But I remained confused , ashamed , and still .
Beneath your kiss , my queen without a stain ,
I felt ,— like ghosts who rise at Judgment Day ,—
A throng of ancient kisses vile and vain !
<29716>
There is a sorrow in the wind to-night
That haunteth me ; she , like a penitent ,
Heaps on rent hairs the snow 's thin ashes white
And moans and moans , her swaying body bent .
And Superstition gliding softly shakes
With wasted hands , that vainly grope and seek ,
The rustling curtains ; of each cranny makes
Cold , ghostly lips that wailing fain would speak .
<30531>
The women stood and watched while thick , black night
Enclosed the awful tragedy . Afar
Three crosses stood , against a single bar
Of crimson-glowing , black-encircled light .
No hint of Easter dawn . In all the height
Of that dark heaven , not a single star
To whisper ;— Love and Life the victors are .
It seemed to them that wrong had conquered right .
O ye who watch and wait , the night is long .
A curtain of spun fire and woven gloom
Across the mighty tragedy is drawn .
But soon your ears shall hear a triumph song ,
And golden light shall touch each sacred tomb ,
And voices shout at last — The Dawn ! The Dawn .
<31075>
I have seen streets where strange enchantment broods :
Old ruddy houses where the morning shone
In seemly quiet on their tranquil moods ,
Across the sills white curtains outward blown .
Their marble steps were scoured as white as bone
Where scrubbing housemaids toiled on wounded knee —
And yet , among all streets that I have known
These placid byways give least peace to me .
In such a house , where green light shining through
( From some back garden ) framed her silhouette
I saw a girl , heard music blithely sung .
She stood there laughing , in a dress of blue ,
And as I went on , slowly , there I met
An old , old woman , who had once been young .
<31702>
My soul said unto me : Yea , God is wise
With wisdom far too bright for our weak eyes .
I answered thus my soul : Yea , God is wise !
My soul said unto me : Yea , God is good
And maketh love to be our daily food .
I answered thus my soul : Yea , God is good !
I sent my soul from me that it might tell
The damned and make a Heaven where was Hell ,
It smiled and said : Nay , fear not , all is well !
<31983>
The women stood and watched while thick , black night
Enclosed the awful tragedy . Afar
Three crosses stood , against a single bar
Of crimson-glowing , black-encircled light .
No hint of Easter dawn . In all the height
Of that dark heaven , not a single star
To whisper ;— Love and Life the victors are .
It seemed to them that wrong had conquered right .
O ye who watch and wait , the night is long .
A curtain of spun fire and woven gloom
Across the mighty tragedy is drawn .
But soon your ears shall hear a triumph song ,
And golden light shall touch each sacred tomb ,
And voices shout at last — The Dawn ! The Dawn !
<32513>
O quiring voices of the sleepless springs ,
O night of beauty , calm and odorous ,
O bird of Thrace , that ever ceaseless sings
The passion of thy music amorous ,
My heart is but a spring that , with its prayer ,
Is choric through an April plenilune ;
My music but a rapture in the air ,
A nightingale loud-voiced in leafy June .
<33192>
This old slow music will have never done
With dancers who were graceful long ago ;
A sigh returns them , one by ghostly one ,
To tunes and measures that they knew — and know .
These lifted faces , floating on a stream ,
Are one with other faces that were fair ,—
That once were light , and summertime and dream ,
And drifted laughter over hall and stair .
The viols end , and two by two they pass
Out of this blaze into the leafy dark ,
Too ghostly and too dim across the grass ,
Too soon obscured and blotted , all ,— till Hark !
This old , slow music that is like a sigh
For silver feet gone , ah , how lightly by .
<33199>
Whenever he would talk to us of ships ,
Old schooners lost , or tall ships under weigh ,
The god of speech was neighbour to his lips ,
A lover 's grace on words he loved to say .
He called them by their names , and you could see
Spars in the sun , keels , and their curling foam ;
And all his mind was like a morning quay
Of ships gone out , and ships come gladly home .
He filled the bay with sails we had not seen :
The Marguerita L ., “ a maid for shape , ”
The slender Kay , the worthy Island Queen ,—
That was his own , he lost her off the Cape ,
“ She was a ship ” — and then he looked away ,
And talked to us no more of ships that day .
<17>
You better sure shall live , not evermore
Trying high seas ; nor , while sea 's rage you flee ,
Pressing too much upon ill-harboured shore .
The golden mean who loves , lives safely free
From filth of foreworn house , and quiet lives ,
Released from court , where envy needs must be .
The wind most oft the hugest pine tree grieves :
The stately towers come down with greater fall :
The highest hills the bolt of thunder cleaves .
Evil haps do fill with hope , good haps appall
With fear of change , the courage well prepared :
Foul winters , as they come , away they shall .
Though present times , and past , with evils be snared ,
They shall not last : with cithern silent Muse ,
Apollo wakes , and bow hath sometime spared .
In hard estate , with stout shows , valour use ,
The same man still , in whom wisdom prevails ;
In too full wind draw in thy swelling sails .
<18>
Prometheus , when first from heaven high
He brought down fire , till then on earth not seen ;
Fond of delight , a satyr , standing by ,
Gave it a kiss , as it like sweet had been .
Feeling forthwith the other burning power ,
Wood with the smart , with shouts and shrieking shrill ,
He sought his ease in river , field , and bower ;
But , for the time , his grief went with him still .
So silly I , with that unwonted sight ,
In human shape an angel from above ,
Feeding mine eyes , th ’ impression there did light ;
That since I run and rest as pleaseth love :
The difference is , the satyr 's lips , my heart ,
He for a while , I evermore , have smart .
<19>
A satyr once did run away for dread ,
With sound of horn which he himself did blow :
Fearing and feared , thus from himself he fled ,
Deeming strange evil in that he did not know .
Such causeless fears when coward minds do take ,
It makes them fly that which they fain would have ;
As this poor beast , who did his rest forsake ,
Thinking not why , but how , himself to save .
Ev'n thus might I , for doubts which I conceive
Of mine own words , my own good hap betray ;
And thus might I , for fear of may be , leave
The sweet pursuit of my desired prey .
Better like I thy satyr , dearest Dyer ,
Who burnt his lips to kiss fair shining fire .
<26>
The dart , the beams , the sting , so strong I prove ,
Which my chief part doth pass through , parch , and tie ,
That of the stroke , the heat , and knot of love ,
Wounded , inflamed , knit to the death , I die .
Hardened and cold , far from affection 's snare
Was once my mind , my temper , and my life ;
While I that sight , desire , and vow forbare ,
Which to avoid , quench , lose , nought boasted strife .
Yet will not I grief , ashes , thraldom change
For others ’ ease , their fruit , or free estate ;
So brave a shot , dear fire , and beauty strange ,
Bid me pierce , burn , and bind , long time and late ,
And in my wounds , my flames , and bonds , I find
A salve , fresh air , and bright contented mind .
Virtue , beauty , and speech , did strike , wound , charm ,
My heart , eyes , ears , with wonder , love , delight ,
First , second , last , did bind , enforce , and arm ,
His works , shows , suits , with wit , grace , and vows ’ might ,
Thus honour , liking , trust , much , far , and deep ,
Held , pierced , possessed , my judgment , sense , and will ,
Till wrongs , contempt , deceit , did grow , steal , creep ,
Bands , favour , faith , to break , defile , and kill ,
Then grief , unkindness , proof , took , kindled , taught ,
Well-grounded , noble , due , spite , rage , disdain :
But ah , alas ! in vain my mind , sight , thought ,
Doth him , his face , his words , leave , shun , refrain .
For nothing , time , nor place , can loose , quench , ease
Mine own embraced , sought , knot , fire , disease .
<29>
Oft have I mused , but now at length I find
Why those that die , men say , they do depart :
Depart : a word so gentle to my mind ,
Weakly did seem to paint Death 's ugly dart .
But now the stars , with their strange course , do bind
Me one to leave , with whom I leave my heart ;
I hear a cry of spirits faint and blind ,
That parting thus , my chiefest part I part .
Part of my life , the loathed part to me ,
Lives to impart my weary clay some breath ;
But that good part wherein all comforts be ,
Now dead , doth show departure is a death :
Yea , worse than death , death parts both woe and joy ,
From joy I part , still living in annoy .
Finding those beams , which I must ever love ,
To mar my mind , and with my hurt to please ,
I deemed it best , some absence for to prove ,
If farther place might further me to ease .
My eyes thence drawn , where lived all their light ,
Blinded forthwith in dark despair did lie ,
Like to the mole , with want of guiding sight ,
Deep plunged in earth , deprived of the sky .
In absence blind , and wearied with that woe ,
To greater woes , by presence , I return ;
Even as the fly , which to the flame doth go ,
Pleased with the light , that his small corse doth burn :
Fair choice I have , either to live or die
A blinded mole , or else a burned fly .
<30>
Leave me , O love ! which reachest but to dust ;
And thou , my mind , aspire to higher things :
Grow rich in that which never taketh rust ;
Whatever fades , but fading pleasure brings .
Draw in thy beams , and humble all thy might
To that sweet yoke where lasting freedoms be ,
Which breaks the clouds , and opens forth the light
That doth both shine , and give us sight to see .
O take fast hold ! let that light be thy guide ,
In this small course which birth draws out to death ,
And think how evil becometh him to slide ,
Who seeketh heaven , and comes from heavenly breath .
Then farewell , world , thy uttermost I see ,
Eternal Love , maintain thy life in me .
<114>
Give period to the process of thy plaint ,
Unhappy Damon , witty in self-grieving ;
Tend thou thy flocks ; let tyrant love attaint
Those tender hearts that made their love their living .
And as kind time keeps Phillis from thy sight ,
So let prevention banish fancy quite .
Cast hence this idle fuel of desire ,
That feeds that flame wherein thy heart consumeth ;
Let reason school thy will which doth aspire ,
And counsel cool impatience that presumeth ;
Drive hence vain thoughts which are fond love 's abettors ,
For he that seeks his thraldom merits fetters .
The vain idea of this deity
Nursed at the teat of thine imagination ,
Was bred , brought up by thine own vanity ,
Whose being thou mayst curse from the creation ;
And so thou list , thou may as soon forget love ,
As thou at first didst fashion and beget love .
<115>
Peace , Demades , peace shepherd , do not tempt me ;
The sage-taught wife may speak thus , but not practise ;
Rather from life than from my love exempt me ,
My happy love wherein my weal and wrack lies ;
Where chilly age first left love , and first lost her ,
There youth found love , liked love , and love did foster .
Not as ambitious of their [ C ] own decay ,
But curious to equal your fore-deeds ,
So tread we now within your wonted way ;
We find your fruits of judgments and their seeds ;
We know you loved , and loving learn that lore ;
You scorn kind love , because you can no more .
Though from this pure refiner of the thought
The gleanings of your learnings have you gathered
Your lives had been abortive , base and naught ,
Except by happy love they had been fathered ;
Then still the swain , for I will still avow it ;
They have no wit nor worth that disallow it .
Then to renew the ruins of my tears
Be thou no hinderer , Demades , I pray thee .
If my love-sighs grow tedious in thine ears ,
Fly me , that fly from joy , I list not stay thee .
Mourn sheep , mourn lambs , and Damon will weep by you ;
And when I sigh , “ Come home , sweet Phillis , ” cry you .
Come home , sweet Phillis , for thine absence causeth
A flowerless prime-tide in these drooping meadows ;
To push his beauties forth each primrose pauseth ,
Our lilies and our roses like coy widows
Shut in their buds , their beauties , and bemoan them ,
Because my Phillis doth not smile upon them .
The trees by my redoubled sighs long blasted
Call for thy balm-sweet breath and sunny eyes ,
To whom all nature 's comforts are hand-fasted ;
Breathe , look on them , and they to life arise ;
They have new liveries with each smile thou lendest ,
And droop with me , when thy fair brow thou bendest .
I woo thee , Phillis , with more earnest weeping
Than Niobe for her dead issue spent ;
I pray thee , nymph who hast our spring in keeping ,
Thou mistress of our flowers and my content ,
Come home , and glad our meads of winter weary ,
And make thy woeful Damon blithe and merry .
Else will I captive all my hopes again ,
And shut them up in prisons of despair ,
And weep such tears as shall destroy this plain ,
And sigh such sighs as shall eclipse the air ,
And cry such cries as love that hears my crying
Shall faint and weep for grief and fall a-dying .
My little world hath vowed no sun shall glad it ,
Except thy little world her light discover ,
Of which heavens would grow proud if so they had it .
Oh how I fear lest absent Jove should love her !
I fear it , Phillis , for he never saw one
That had more heaven-sweet looks to lure and awe one .
I swear to thee , all-seeing sovereign
Rolling heaven 's circles round about our center ,
Except my Phillis safe return again ,
No joy to heart , no meat to mouth shall enter .
All hope ( but future hope to be renowned ,
For weeping Phillis ) shall in tears be drowned .
<116>
How large a scope lends Damon to his moan ,
Wafting those treasures of his happy wit
In registering his woeful woe-begone !
Ah bend thy muse to matters far more fit !
For time shall come when Phillis is interred ,
That Damon shall confess that he hath erred .
When nature 's riches shall , by time dissolved ,
Call thee to see with more judicial eye
How Phillis ’ beauties are to dust resolved ,
Thou then shalt ask thyself the reason why
Thou wert so fond , since Phillis was so frail ,
To praise her gifts that should so quickly fail .
Have mercy on thyself , cease being idle ,
Let reason claim and gain of will his homage ;
Rein in these brain-sick thoughts with judgment 's bridle ,
A short prevention helps a mighty domage .
If Phillis love , love her , yet love her so
That if she fly , thou may'st love 's fire forego .
Play with the fire , yet die not in the flame ;
Show passions in thy words , but not in heart ;
Lest when thou think to bring thy thoughts in frame ,
Thou prove thyself a prisoner by thine art .
Play with these babes of love , as apes with glasses ,
And put no trust in feathers , wind , or lasses .
<117>
Did not thine age yield warrantise , old man ,
Impatience would enforce me to offend thee ;
Me list not now thy forward skill to scan ,
Yet will I pray that love may mend or end thee .
Spring flowers , sea-tides , earth , grass , sky , stars shall banish ,
Before the thoughts of love or Phillis vanish .
So get thee gone , and fold thy tender sheep ,
For lo , the great automaton of day
In Isis stream his golden locks doth steep ;
Sad even her dusky mantle doth display ;
Light-flying fowls , the posts of night , disport them ,
And cheerful-looking vesper doth consort them .
Come you , my careful flock , forego you master ,
I 'll fold you up and after fall a-sighing ;
Words have no worth my secret wounds to plaster ;
Naught may refresh my joys but Phillis nighing .
<188>
Give back unto mine eyes , ye fount and rill ,
Those streams , not yours , that are so full and strong ,
That swell your springs , and roll your waves along
With force unwonted in your native hill !
And thou , dense air , weighed with my sighs so chill ,
That hidest heaven 's own light thick mists among ,
Give back those sighs to my sad heart , nor wrong
My visual ray with thy dark face of ill !
Let earth give back the footprints that I wore ,
That the bare grass I spoiled may sprout again ;
And Echo , now grown deaf , my cries return !
Loved eyes , unto mine eyes those looks restore ,
And let me woo another not in vain ,
Since how to please thee I shall never learn !
<191>
I know not if it be the fancied light
Which every man or more or less doth feel ;
Or if the mind and memory reveal
Some other beauty for the heart 's delight ;
Or if within the soul the vision bright
Of her celestial home once more doth steal ,
Drawing our better thoughts with pure appeal
To the true Good above all mortal sight :
This light I long for and unguided seek ;
This fire that burns my heart , I cannot find ;
Nor know the way , though some one seems to lead .
This , since I saw thee , lady , makes me weak :
A bitter-sweet sways here and there my mind ;
And sure I am thine eyes this mischief breed .
<218>
Well might I in those days so fortunate ,
What time the sun lightened my path above ,
Have soared from earth to heaven , raised by her love
Who winged my labouring soul and sweetened fate .
That sun hath set ; and I with hope elate
Who deemed that those bright days would never move ,
Find that my thankless soul , deprived thereof ,
Declines to death , while heaven still bars the gate .
Love lent me wings ; my path was like a stair ;
A lamp unto my feet , that sun was given ;
And death was safety and great joy to find .
But dying now , I shall not climb to heaven ;
Nor can mere memory cheer my heart 's despair :—
What help remains when hope is left behind ?
<219>
If being near the fire I burned with it ,
Now that its flame is quenched and doth not show ,
What wonder if I waste within and glow ,
Dwindling away to cinders bit by bit ?
While still it burned , I saw so brightly lit
That splendour whence I drew my grievous woe ,
That from its sight alone could pleasure flow ,
And death and torment both seemed exquisite .
But now that heaven hath robbed me of the blaze
Of that great fire which burned and nourished me ,
A coal that smoulders ‘ neath the ash am I .
Unless Love furnish wood fresh flames to raise ,
I shall expire with not one spark to see ,
So quickly into embers do I die !
<220>
Now hath my life across a stormy sea
Like a frail bark reached that wide port where all
Are bidden , ere the final reckoning fall
Of good and evil for eternity .
Now know I well how that fond phantasy
Which made my soul the worshipper and thrall
Of earthly art , is vain ; how criminal
Is that which all men seek unwillingly .
Those amorous thoughts which were so lightly dressed ,
What are they when the double death is nigh ?
The one I know for sure , the other dread .
Painting nor sculpture now can lull to rest
My soul that turns to His great love on high ,
Whose arms to clasp us on the cross were spread .
<221>
The fables of the world have filched away
The time I had for thinking upon God ;
His grace lies buried ‘ neath oblivion 's sod ,
Whence springs an evil crop of sins alway .
What makes another wise , leads me astray ,
Slow to discern the bad path I have trod :
Hope fades ; but still desire ascends that God
May free me from self-love , my sure decay .
Shorten half-way my road to heaven from earth !
Dear Lord , I cannot even half-way rise ,
Unless Thou help me on this pilgrimage .
Teach me to hate the world so little worth ,
And all the lovely things I clasp and prize ;
That endless life , ere death , may be my wage .
<222>
There 's not on earth a thing more vile and base
Than , lacking Thee , I feel myself to be :
For pardon prays my own debility ,
Yearning in vain to lift me to Thy face .
Stretch to me , Lord , that chain whose links enlace
All heavenly gifts and all felicity —
Faith , whereunto I strive perpetually ,
Yet cannot find ( my fault ) her perfect grace .
That gift of gifts , the rarer ‘ tis , the more
I count it great ; more great , because to earth
Without it neither peace nor joy is given .
If Thou Thy blood so lovingly didst pour ,
Let not that bounty fail or suffer dearth ,
Withholding Faith that opes the doors of heaven .
<223>
God 's grace , the cross , our troubles multiplied ,
Will make us meet in heaven , full well I know :
Yet ere we yield our breath , on earth below
Why need a little solace be denied ?
Though seas and mountains and rough ways divide
Our feet asunder , neither frost nor snow
Can make the soul her ancient love forgo ;
Nor chains nor bonds the wings of thought have tied .
Borne by these wings with thee I dwell for aye ,
And weep , and of my dead Urbino talk ,
Who , were he living , now perchance would be ,
For so ‘ twas planned , thy guest as well as I :
Warned by his death another way I walk
To meet him where he waits to live with me .
<224>
My death must come ; but when , I do not know :
Life 's short , and little life remains for me :
Fain would my flesh abide ; my soul would flee
Heavenward , for still she calls on me to go .
Blind is the world ; and evil here below
O'erwhelms and triumphs over honesty :
The light is quenched ; quenched too is bravery :
Lies reign , and truth hath ceased her face to show .
When will that day dawn , Lord , for which he waits
Who trusts in Thee ? Lo , this prolonged delay
Destroys all hope and robs the soul of life .
Why streams the light from those celestial gates ,
If death prevent the day of grace , and stay
Our souls for ever in the toils of strife ?
<225>
Burdened with years and full of sinfulness ,
With evil custom grown inveterate ,
Both deaths I dread that close before me wait ,
Yet feed my heart on poisonous thoughts no less .
No strength I find in mine own feebleness
To change or life or love or use or fate ,
Unless Thy heavenly guidance come , though late ,
Which only helps and stays our nothingness .
‘ Tis not enough , dear Lord , to make me yearn
For that celestial home , where yet my soul
May be new made , and not , as erst , of nought :
Nay , ere Thou strip her mortal vestment , turn
My steps toward the steep ascent , that whole
And pure before Thy face she may be brought .
<244>
Wisdom is riches great and great estate ,
Far above wealth ; nor are the wise unblest
If born of lineage vile or race oppressed :
These by their doom sublime they illustrate .
They have their griefs for guerdon , to dilate
Their name and glory ; nay , the cross , the sword
Make them to be like saints or God adored ;
And gladness greets them in the frowns of fate :
For joys and sorrows are their dear delight ;
Even as a lover takes the weal and woe
Felt for his lady . Such is wisdom 's might .
But wealth still vexes fools ; more vile they grow
By being noble ; and their luckless light
With each new misadventure burns more low .
<245>
Once on a time the astronomers foresaw
The coming of a star to madden men :
Thus warned they fled the land , thinking that when
The folk were crazed , they 'd hold the reins of law
When they returned the realm to overawe ,
They prayed those maniacs to quit cave and den ,
And use their old good customs once again ;
But these made answer with fist , tooth , and claw :
So that the wise men were obliged to rule
Themselves like lunatics to shun grim death ,
Seeing the biggest maniac now was king .
Stifling their sense , they lived , aping the fool ,
In public praising act and word and thing
Just as the whims of madmen swayed their breath .
<246>
The world 's a theatre : age after age ,
Souls masked and muffled in their fleshly gear
Before the supreme audience appear ,
As Nature , God 's own Art , appoints the stage .
Each plays the part that is his heritage ;
From choir to choir they pass , from sphere to sphere ,
And deck themselves with joy or sorry cheer ,
As Fate the comic playwright fills the page .
None do or suffer , be they cursed or blest ,
Aught otherwise than the great Wisdom wrote
To gladden each and all who gave Him mirth ,
When we at last to sea or air or earth
Yielding these masks that weal or woe denote ,
In God shall see who spoke and acted best .
<247>
Nature , by God directed , formed in space
The universal comedy we see ;
Wherein each star , each man , each entity ,
Each living creature , hath its part and place :
And when the play is over , it shall be
That God will judge with justice and with grace .—
Aping this art divine , the human race
Plans for itself on earth a comedy :
It makes kings , priests , slaves , heroes for the eyes
Of vulgar folk ; and gives them masks to play
Their several parts — not wisely , as we see ;
For impious men too oft we canonise ,
And kill the saints ; while spurious lords array
Their hosts against the real nobility .
<248>
Nero was king by accident in show ;
But Socrates by nature in good sooth ;
By right of both Augustus ; luck and truth
Less perfectly were blent in Scipio .
The spurious prince still seeks to extirpate
The seed of natures born imperial —
Like Herod , Caiaphas , Meletus , all
Who by bad acts sustain their stolen state .
Slaves whose souls tell them that they are but slaves ,
Strike those whose native kinghood all can see :
Martyrdom is the stamp of royalty .
Dead though they be , these govern from their graves :
The tyrants fall , nor can their laws remain ;
While Paul and Peter rise o'er Rome to reign .
<287>
How wilt Thou I should gain a harbour fair ,
If after proof among my friends I find
That some are faithless , some devoid of mind ,
Some short of sense , though stout to do and dare ?
If some , though wise and loyal , like the hare
Hide in a hole , or fly in terror blind ,
While nerve with wisdom and with faith combined
Through malice and through penury despair ?
Reason , Thy honour , and my weal eschewed
That false ally who said he came from Thee ,
With promise vain of power and liberty .
I trust :— I 'll do . Change Thou the bad to good !—
But ere I raise me to that altitude ,
Needs must I merge in Thee as Thou in me .
<302>
In sober mornings , do not thou rehearse
The holy incantation of a verse ;
But when that men have both well drunk and fed ,
Let my enchantments then be sung or read .
When laurel spirts i'th ’ fire , and when the hearth
Smiles to itself , and gilds the roof with mirth ;
When up the thyrse [ C ] is rais 'd , and when the sound
Of sacred orgies [ D ] flies , a round , a round .
When the rose reigns , and locks with ointments shine ,
Let rigid Cato read these lines of mine .
<317>
Now is the time , when all the lights wax dim ;
And thou , Anthea , must withdraw from him
Who was thy servant . Dearest , bury me
Under that Holy-oak or Gospel-tree ,
Where , though thou see'st not , thou may'st think upon
Me , when thou yearly go'st procession ;
Or , for mine honour , lay me in that tomb
In which thy sacred relics shall have room .
For my embalming , sweetest , there will be
No spices wanting when I 'm laid by thee .
<319>
When some shall say , Fair once my Silvia was ,
Thou wilt complain , False now 's thy looking-glass ,
Which renders that quite tarnished which was green ,
And priceless now what peerless once had been .
Upon thy form more wrinkles yet will fall ,
And , coming down , shall make no noise at all .
<320>
So smooth , so sweet , so silv'ry is thy voice ,
As , could they hear , the damn 'd would make no noise ,
But listen to thee , walking in thy chamber ,
Melting melodious words to lutes of amber .
<321>
All things decay with time : the forest sees
The growth and downfall of her aged trees ;
That timber tall , which threescore lusters stood
The proud dictator of the state-like wood ,—
I mean ( the sovereign of all plants ) the oak —
Droops , dies , and falls without the cleaver 's stroke .
<322>
Thou sail'st with others in this Argus here ;
Nor wreck or bulging thou hast cause to fear ;
But trust to this , my noble passenger ;
Who swims with virtue , he shall still be sure
( Ulysses-like ) all tempests to endure ,
And ‘ midst a thousand gulfs to be secure .
<323>
First , for effusions due unto the dead ,
My solemn vows have here accomplished :
Next , how I love thee , that my grief must tell ,
Wherein thou liv'st for ever . Dear , farewell .
<325>
Woe , woe to them , who , by a ball of strife ,
Do , and have parted here a man and wife :
CHARLES the best husband , while MARIA strives
To be , and is , the very best of wives ,
Like streams , you are divorc 'd ; but ‘ twill come when
These eyes of mine shall see you mix again .
Thus speaks the oak here ; C. and M. shall meet ,
Treading on amber , with their silver-feet ,
Nor will't be long ere this accomplish 'd be :
The words found true , C. M ., remember me .
<335>
Good princes must be pray 'd for ; for the bad
They must be borne with , and in rev'rence had .
Do they first pill thee , next pluck off thy skin ?
Good children kiss the rods that punish sin .
Touch not the tyrant ; let the gods alone
To strike him dead that but usurps a throne .
<349>
Where others love and praise my verses , still
Thy long black thumb-nail marks them out for ill :
A fellon take it , or some whitflaw come
For to unslate or to untile that thumb !
But cry thee mercy : exercise thy nails
To scratch or claw , so that thy tongue not rails :
Some numbers prurient are , and some of these
Are wanton with their itch ; scratch , and ‘ twill please .
<373>
Charms , that call down the moon from out her sphere ,
On this sick youth work your enchantments here :
Bind up his senses with your numbers so
As to entrance his pain , or cure his woe .
Fall gently , gently , and a while him keep
Lost in the civil wilderness of sleep :
That done , then let him , dispossessed of pain ,
Like to a slumb'ring bride , awake again .
Never my book 's perfection did appear
Till I had got the name of Villars here :
Now ‘ tis so full that when therein I look
I see a cloud of glory fills my book .
Here stand it still to dignify our Muse ,
Your sober handmaid , who doth wisely choose
Your name to be a laureate wreath to her
Who doth both love and fear you , honoured sir .
<391>
For one so rarely tun 'd to fit all parts ,
For one to whom espous 'd are all the arts ,
Long have I sought for , but could never see
Them all concentr 'd in one man , but thee .
Thus , thou that man art whom the fates conspir 'd
To make but one , and that 's thyself , admir 'd .
<398>
I can but name thee , and methinks I call
All that have been , or are canonical
For love and bounty to come near , and see
Their many virtues volum 'd up in thee ;
In thee , brave man ! whose incorrupted fame
Casts forth a light like to a virgin flame ;
And as it shines it throws a scent about ,
As when a rainbow in perfumes goes out .
So vanish hence , but leave a name as sweet
As benjamin and storax when they meet .
<END>
