# Selected poems from the English Project Gutenberg Corpus (see https://github.com/tnhaider/metrical-tagging-in-the-wild/tree/main)
# 100 poems in ternary metres for exp. 3a

<31>
When I a verse shall make ,
Know I have pray 'd thee ,
For old religion 's sake ,
Saint Ben , to aid me
Make the way smooth for me ,
When , I , thy Herrick ,
Honouring thee on my knee
Offer my Lyric .
Candles I 'll give to thee ,
And a new altar ;
And thou , Saint Ben , shalt be
Writ in my psalter .
<617>
God , as the learned Damascene doth write ,
A sea of substance is , indefinite .
<1266>
1 Let the nymph still avoid and be deaf to the swain ,
Who in transports of passion affects to complain ;
For his rage , not his love , in that frenzy is shown ,
And the blast that blows loudest is soon overblown .
2 But the shepherd whom Cupid has pierced to the heart ,
Will submissive adore , and rejoice in the smart ;
Or in plaintive , soft murmurs his bosom-felt woe ,
Like the smooth-gliding current of rivers , will flow .
3 Though silent his tongue , he will plead with his eyes ,
And his heart own your sway in a tribute of sighs :
But when he accosts you in meadow or grove ,
His tale is all tenderness , rapture , and love .
<1267>
1 From the man whom I love though my heart I disguise ,
I will freely describe the wretch I despise ;
And if he has sense but to balance a straw ,
He will sure take the hint from the picture I draw .
2 A wit without sense , without fancy a beau ,
Like a parrot he chatters , and struts like a crow ;
A peacock in pride , in grimace a baboon ,
In courage a hind , in conceit a Gascon .
3 As a vulture rapacious , in falsehood a fox ,
Inconstant as waves , and unfeeling as rocks ;
As a tiger ferocious , perverse as a hog ,
In mischief an ape , and in fawning a dog .
4 In a word , to sum up all his talents together ,
His heart is of lead , and his brain is of feather ;
Yet , if he has sense but to balance a straw ,
He will sure take the hint from the picture I draw .
<1268>
1 Come listen , ye students of every degree ;
I sing of a wit and a tutor perdie ,
A statesman profound , a critic immense ,
In short , a mere jumble of learning and sense ;
And yet of his talents though laudably vain ,
His own family arts he could never attain .
2 His father , intending his fortune to build ,
In his youth would have taught him the trowel to wield .
But the mortar of discipline never would stick ,
For his skull was secured by a facing of brick ;
And with all his endeavours of patience and pain ,
The skill of his sire he could never attain .
3 His mother , a housewife , neat , artful , and wise ,
Renown 'd for her delicate biscuit and pies ,
Soon alter 'd his studies , by flattering his taste ,
From the raising of wall to the rearing of paste ;
But all her instructions were fruitless and vain ,
The pye-making mystery he could ne'er attain .
4 Yet , true to his race , in his labours were seen
A jumble of both their professions , I ween ;
For when his own genius he ventured to trust ,
His pies seem 'd of brick , and his houses of crust ;
Then , good Mr Tutor , pray be not so vain ,
Since your family arts you could never attain .
<1376>
Mountain in labour announced the new birth
With clamour so loud that the people all thought
‘ Twould at least bear a city , the largest on earth .
It was merely a Mouse that the incident brought .
When I think of this fable , so false in its fact ,
And so true in its moral , it brings to my mind
Those common-place authors who try to attract
Attention by means of the subjects they find .
“ I will sing about Jove and the Titans , ” cries one ;
But how often the song comes to nothing , when done !
<1419>
People pray to and weary the gods , now and then ,
About trifles unworthy to interest men ;
Thinking Providence cruel unless it contrives
To design to their likings the whole of their lives .
Why believe that Olympus should study us more
Than it studied the Greeks and the Trojans of yore ?
A gaby was bit on the shoulder , one night ,
By a Flea , which took refuge instanter in flight .
“ O Hercules , Hercules , prithee come down ,
And exterminate Fleas ! ” cried the suppliant clown .
“ O Jupiter , strike with your lightning the beasts ,
And avenge me on them and their horrible feasts ! ”
To punish a Flea , ‘ twould be rather a wonder
If gods went to work with their clubs and their thunder .
<1542>
Are the guests of this house still doom 'd to be cheated ?
Sure the Fates have decreed they by halves should be treated .
In the days of good John[ 1 ]if you came here to dine ,
You had choice of good meat , but no choice of good wine .
In Jonathan 's reign , if you come here to eat ,
You have choice of good wine , but no choice of good meat .
O Jove ! then how fully might all sides be blest ,
Wouldst thou but agree to this humble request !
Put both deans in one ; or , if that 's too much trouble ,
Instead of the deans , make the deanery double .
<1605>
The scriptures affirm ( as I heard in my youth ,
For indeed I ne'er read them , to speak for once truth )
That death is the wages of sin , but the just
Shall die not , although they be laid in the dust .
They say so ; so be it , I care not a straw ,
Although I be dead both in gospel and law ;
In verse I shall live , and be read in each climate ;
What more can be said of prime sergeant or primate ?
While Carter and Prendergast both may be rotten ,
And damn 'd to the bargain , and yet be forgotten .
In your indignation what mercy appears ,
While Jonathan 's threaten 'd with loss of his ears ;
For who would not think it a much better choice ,
By your knife to be mangled than rack 'd with your voice .
If truly you [ would ] be revenged on the parson ,
Command his attendance while you act your farce on ;
Instead of your maiming , your shooting , or banging ,
Bid Povey[ 1 ]secure him while you are haranguing .
Had this been your method to torture him , long since ,
He had cut his own ears to be deaf to your nonsense .
<1617>
Lord Pam[ 3 ]in the church ( you 'd you think it ) kneel 'd down ;
When told that the Duke was just come to Town —
His station despising , unawed by the place ,
He flies from his God to attend to his Grace .
To the Court it was better to pay his devotion ,
Since God had no hand in his Lordship 's promotion .
<1756>
1 A Choir of bright beauties in spring did appear ,
To choose a May-lady to govern the year ;
All the nymphs were in white , and the shepherds in green ;
The garland was given , and Phyllis was queen :
But Phyllis refused it , and sighing did say ,
I 'll not wear a garland while Pan is away .
2 While Pan and fair Syrinx are fled from our shore ,
The Graces are banish 'd , and Love is no more :
The soft god of pleasure , that warm 'd our desires ,
Has broken his bow , and extinguish 'd his fires ;
And vows that himself and his mother will mourn ,
Till Pan and fair Syrinx in triumph return .
3 Forbear your addresses , and court us no more ;
For we will perform what the Deity swore :
But if you dare think of deserving our charms ,
Away with your sheephooks , and take to your arms ;
Then laurels and myrtles your brows shall adorn ,
When Pan , and his son , and fair Syrinx return .
<1764>
Wherever I am , and whatever I do ,
My Phyllis is still in my mind ;
When angry , I mean not to Phyllis to go ,
My feet , of themselves , the way find :
Unknown to myself I am just at her door ,
And when I would rail , I can bring out no more ,
Than , Phyllis too fair and unkind !
When Phyllis I see , my heart bounds in my breast ,
And the love I would stifle is shown ;
But asleep or awake I am never at rest ,
When from my eyes Phyllis is gone .
Sometimes a sad dream does delude my sad mind ;
But , alas ! when I wake , and no Phyllis I find ,
How I sigh to myself all alone !
Should a king be my rival in her I adore ,
He should offer his treasure in vain :
Oh , let me alone to be happy and poor ,
And give me my Phyllis again !
Let Phyllis be mine , and but ever be kind ,
I could to a desert with her be confined ,
And envy no monarch his reign .
Alas ! I discover too much of my love ,
And she too well knows her own power !
She makes me each day a new martyrdom prove ,
And makes me grow jealous each hour :
But let her each minute torment my poor mind ,
I had rather love Phyllis , both false and unkind ,
Than ever be freed from her power .
HE . How unhappy a lover am I ,
While I sigh for my Phyllis in vain :
All my hopes of delight
Are another man 's right ,
Who is happy , while I am in pain !
SHE . Since her honour allows no relief ,
But to pity the pains which you bear ,
‘ Tis the best of your fate ,
In a hopeless estate ,
To give o'er , and betimes to despair .
HE . I have tried the false medicine in vain ;
For I wish what I hope not to win :
From without , my desire
Has no food to its fire ;
But it burns and consumes me within .
SHE . Yet , at least , ‘ tis a pleasure to know
That you are not unhappy alone :
For the nymph you adore
Is as wretched , and more ;
And counts all your sufferings her own .
HE . O ye gods , let me suffer for both ;
At the feet of my Phyllis I 'll lie :
I 'll resign up my breath ,
And take pleasure in death ,
To be pitied by her when I die .
SHE . What her honour denied you in life ,
In her death she will give to your love .
Such a flame as is true
After fate will renew ,
For the souls to meet closer above .
<1870>
Farewell , fair Armida , my joy and my grief !
In vain I have loved you , and hope no relief ;
Undone by your virtue , too strict and severe ,
Your eyes gave me love , and you gave me despair :
Now called by my honour , I seek with content
The fate which in pity you would not prevent :
To languish in love were to find , by delay ,
A death that 's more welcome the speediest way .
On seas and in battles , in bullets and fire ,
The danger is less than in hopeless desire ;
My death 's wound you give me , though far off I bear
My fall from your sight — not to cost you a tear ;
But if the kind flood on a wave should convey ,
And under your window my body should lay ,
The wound on my breast when you happen to see ,
You 'll say with a sigh — it was given by me .
<1875>
Sylvia , the fair , in the bloom of fifteen ,
Felt an innocent warmth as she lay on the green ;
She had heard of a pleasure , and something she guest
By the towzing , and tumbling , and touching her breast .
She saw the men eager , but was at a loss ,
What they meant by their sighing , and kissing so close ;
By their praying and whining ,
And clasping and twining ,
And panting and wishing ,
And sighing and kissing ,
And sighing and kissing so close .
Ah ! she cried , ah , for a languishing maid ,
In a country of Christians , to die without aid !
Not a Whig , or a Tory , or Trimmer at least ,
Or a Protestant parson , or Catholic priest ,
To instruct a young virgin , that is at a loss ,
What they meant by their sighing , and kissing so close !
By their praying and whining ,
And clasping and twining ,
And panting and wishing ,
And sighing and kissing ,
And sighing and kissing so close .
Cupid , in shape of a swain , did appear ,
He saw the sad wound , and in pity drew near ;
Then showed her his arrow , and bid her not fear ,
For the pain was no more than a maiden may bear .
When the balm was infused , she was not at a loss ,
What they meant by their sighing , and kissing so close ;
By their praying and whining ,
And clasping and twining ,
And panting and wishing ,
And sighing and kissing ,
And sighing and kissing so close .
<1997>
‘ Tis the voice of the Sluggard : I heard him complain ,
‘ You have waked me too soon ! I must slumber again ! ’
As the door on its hinges , so he on his bed
Turn his sides , and his shoulders , and his heavy head .
‘ A little more sleep , and a little more slumber ! ’
Thus he wastes half his days and his hours without number ;
And when he gets up he sits folding his hands ,
Or walks about sauntering , or trifling he stands .
I pass 'd by his garden , and saw the wild brier ,
The thorn , and the thistle grow broader and higher ;
The clothes that hang on him are turning to rags ;
And his money still wastes , till he starves or he begs .
I made him a visit , still hoping to find
He had took better care for improving his mind :
He told me his dreams , talk 'd of eating and drinking ;
But he scarce reads his Bible , and never loves thinking .
Said I then to my heart , ‘ Here 's a lesson for me !
That man 's but a picture of what I might be ;
But thanks to my friends for their care in my breeding ,
Who have taught me by times to love working and reading ! ’
<1998>
These Emmets , how little they are in our eyes !
We tread them to dust , and a troop of them dies ,
Without our regard or concern :
Yet , as wise as we are , if we went to their school ,
There 's many a sluggard and many a fool
Some lessons of wisdom might learn .
They wear not their time out in sleeping or play ,
But gather up corn in a sunshiny day ,
And for winter they lay up their stores :
They manage their work in such regular forms ,
One would think they foresaw all the frosts and the storms ,
And so brought their food within doors .
But I have less sense than a poor creeping Ant ,
If I take not due care for the things I shall want ,
Nor provide against dangers in time :
When death or old age shall once stare in my face ,
What a wretch shall I be in the end of my days ,
If I trifle away all their prime !
Now , now , while my strength and my youth are in bloom ,
Let me think what shall serve me when sickness shall come ,
And pray that my sins be forgiven .
Let me read in good books , and believe , and obey ;
That , when death turns me out of this cottage of clay ,
I may dwell in a palace in heaven .
<2002>
How fair is the Rose ! what a beautiful flower !
The glory of April and May :
But the leaves are beginning to fade in an hour ,
And they wither and die in a day .
Yet the Rose has one powerful virtue to boast ,
Above all the flowers of the field !
When its leaves are all dead and fine colors are lost ,
Still how sweet a perfume it will yield !
So frail is the youth and the beauty of man ,
Though they bloom and look gay like the Rose ;
But all our fond care to preserve them is vain ,
Time kills them as fast as he goes .
Then I 'll not be proud of my youth and my beauty ,
Since both of them wither and fade ;
But gain a good name by well doing my duty :
This will scent like a Rose when I 'm dead .
<2010>
How fine has the day been ! how bright was the sun !
How lovely and joyful the course that he run ;
Though he rose in a mist when his race he begun ,
And there follow 'd some droppings of rain :
But now the fair traveler 's come to the west ,
His rays are all gold , and his beauties are best ;
He paints the skies gay as he sinks to his rest ,
And foretells a bright rising again .
Just such is the Christian . His course he begins
Like the sun in a mist , while he mourns for his sins ,
And melts into tears ; then he breaks out and shines ,
And travels his heavenly way :
But when he comes nearer to finish his race
Like a fine setting sun , he looks richer in grace ;
And gives a sure hope , at the end of his days
Of rising in brighter array .
<2043>
Dear Billy , with thanks , I return thee thy switch ,
Which has many times kept me out of the ditch .
I have found oft when stumbling o'er hillock or stone ,
A slender supporter is better than none !
When the stars were beclouded and darkness prevail 'd ,
And the rain was descending , its aid never fail 'd ;
For it grop 'd out my way , and assisted my sight ,—
When my foot would have slipp 'd , it kept me upright .
It never forsook me , or broke my command ,
Unless it was when it slipt out of my hand ;
Then myself it might blame , for not taking more care ,
For when duty demanded it always was there .
It is rare upon earth to find such a friend ,
On which one can always so safely depend ;—
When help was most needed it paid most regard ,
And never reprov 'd me for using it hard !
<2045>
The miser 's away , and he 'll never come back ,
Any more his rusty old guineas to crack ,
By his niggardly fare , of potatoes and fish ,
His successor enjoys a more plentiful dish .
I once had occasion to pass by his door ,
Whose threshold so seldom was cross 'd by the poor ,
A kitten came out in its innocent play ,
And pleasantly three-thrumm 'd — “ The Miser 's away ! ”
The way weary traveller , to shorten the mile ,
Sometimes has occasion to go by the style ;
The gain that he gets , his spirit revives ,
He cuts off an elbow , and sooner arrives .
Through one of his fields the pathway doth lie ,
And very few ‘ scap 'd the dint of his eye .
The gate as it opens and creaks , seems to say ,
‘ Pass stranger , and welcome ’ — “ The Miser 's away ! ”
In his ancient old Intake , long kept without fence ,
And without cultivation , for fear of expence ,
By the plough , or the spade , the rough is made plain ,
And the hopeful young husbandman scatters the grain .
Where the bones of the gimmer decay 'd on the ground ,
And nettles and briars were every where found ,
Fine corn is now growing , all smiling and gay ;
It had not been so , but — “ The Miser 's away ! ”
The birds haste away to the green holly bush ,
The blackbird now tries to outrival the thrush ;
They tip the tall branches on fluttering wing ,
Make nearer approaches , and merrily sing .
The flowers in the garden around the bee-hive ,
With unwonted freshness begin to revive ,
To each new beholder their beauties display ,
And whisper in perfume — “ The Miser 's away ! ”
Here among his old books his Sabbaths he spent ,
On logic and physic sat making comment ;—
He thought it would be the best method to use ,
To save both his carcase , his money , and shoes ;—
He 'd be his own doctor , and preacher likewise ,
And his old yellow heap , like a mountain would rise !
The riches he heap 'd up , by night and by day ,
Another has found , for — “ The Miser 's away ! ”
<2052>
‘ Twas a bit gone December ,
As I well remember ,
I met with a rubber , and got some advice ;
What harbour to rest in ,
What Friend to put trust in ,
And how we may walk with slape shoes upon ice !
In coming down Limber ,
Among the young timber ,
My foot slipt , and falling , it was a take in ,
The night being darkish ,
And we a bit larkish ,
Instead of a broom bush , I grasped a whin !
When my fingers were bleeding ,
And pain was succeeding ,
It set me a thinking ,— of that you 'll not doubt ;
And but for the blunder ,
Which lessen 'd the wonder ,
I else had been punish 'd enough to sing out !
My views being muddy ,
I quickly did study ,
What things upon earth to compare with this whin ;
After walking around ‘ em ,
I very soon found ‘ em
To be a false friend , or the pleasures of sin !
A true Friend is precious ,
His favour 's delicious ,
He 'll give you a lift , when he sees you break down ;
In conflicts distressing ,
You 'll find him a blessing ,
He 'll mark your oppressions , and call them his own !
But a false Friend will vary ,
And vow quite contrary ,
His heart to your grief will be hard as a stone ;
In sorrow or sickness ,
He 'll pity your weakness ,
But only plant under your pillow a thorn !
While your money is chinking ,
He 'll answer you winking ,
He 'll “ Master , ” and “ Sir ” you , and come at your call ;
But give him a pincher ,
You 'll find him a flincher ,
Instead of a lift , he will fling you a fall !
So sin is deceiving ,
Bewitching , bereaving ;
‘ Twill pierce through the heart , and invite you to sing ;
‘ Twill put on fair faces ,
To woo your embraces ,
But after you 've grasp 'd it , there follows a sting !
<2056>
A Swallow one evening was sweeping along ,
‘ Mongst such as against her were spiteful ,
An impudent Sparrow requested a song ,
Affirming her voice was delightful !
The innocent Swallow consented ,
But afterwards sadly repented ;
For the nest she had been at such pains to erect ,
She was soon from enjoying prevented !
To the ridge of the barn they hurried along ,
As fast as their feathers could speed them ,
Where she tweedled and sung , in her African tongue ,
Her favourite anthem on Freedom !
While she was this Sparrow amusing ,
The rest were her labours abusing ;—
They had taken possession both of garret and floor ,
And were in her best chamber carousing !
When the Sparrow beheld by the flood in her eye ,
How much this bad treatment did grieve her ,
With contempt in his manner he bade her good by
Nor pitied , nor tried to relieve her !
Still her sweet little song did not alter ,
Her delicate voice did not falter ;
But she tweedled and sung what was next to be done ,
As though she alone was the faulter !
Reproving the Sparrows she then seem 'd to say ,
“ To you we are surely no strangers ;
To pay you this visit , in crossing the sea ,—
We encounter a great many dangers .
O Sparrows ! why have you betray 'd us ?
‘ Tis cruelty thus to invade us !
We bring summer with us , take nothing away ,
O Sparrows ! why have you betray 'd us ? ”
<2063>
From a boy much indulg 'd , he grew up to a man ,
And had liberty almost unbounded ;
Nor scarce ever thought of this life 's little span ,
With prospects of plenty surrounded !
His steed , like himself , in high spirits he views ,
As it snuffs at the fresh flowing fountain ;
On which oft at daybreak he brushes the dews ,
And gallops o'er valley and mountain !
His cheek round and fat , wears the hue of the rose ,
He seems quite a stranger to sorrow ;
And while on his sofa his limbs find repose ,
He laughs loudly , and talks of to-morrow !
“ To-morrow , ” says he , “ you must call up the hounds ,
As soon as the light is appearing ! ” —
Not thinking that Death while rambling his rounds ,
To his mansion a message is bearing ,
“ To-morrow , ” says he , “ we 'll unkennel the fox ,
Or in his old cabin we 'll crush him ;
Or when we have got him away from the rocks ,
In spite of Old Harry we 'll brush him !
And then we will dine on the lamb or the goose ,
Which , if he had liv 'd would have fill 'd him ;
Then o'er a full bumper we 'll have a carouse ,
And we 'll sing where he fell , and who kill 'd him ! ”
But ah ! when life 's stern disappointment he meets ,
Like a lion imprison 'd he grieves ,
That he who expected so much of life 's sweets ,
So soon of its bitters receives !
Disease o'er his fortified barriers leaps ,
And with internal pain soon afflicts him ;—
Next into his chamber the pale monster creeps ,
And singles him out as his victim !
Like a leaf that in autumn falls dead from the tree ,
Soon a train is seen weeping behind him :—
A visit I made , his improvements to see ,
And I look 'd , but alas , could not find him !
<2082>
Oh ! when shall the grave hide for ever my sorrow ?
Oh ! when shall my soul wing her flight from this clay ?
The present is hell ! and the coming to-morrow
But brings , with new torture , the curse of to-day .
From my eye flows no tear , from my lips flow no curses , [ i ]
I blast not the fiends who have hurl 'd me from bliss ;
For poor is the soul which , bewailing , rehearses
Its querulous grief , when in anguish like this —
Was my eye , ‘ stead of tears , with red fury flakes bright'ning ,
Would my lips breathe a flame which no stream could assuage ,
On our foes should my glance launch in vengeance its lightning ,
With transport my tongue give a loose to its rage .
But now tears and curses , alike unavailing ,
Would add to the souls of our tyrants delight ;
Could they view us our sad separation bewailing ,
Their merciless hearts would rejoice at the sight .
Yet , still , though we bend with a feign 'd resignation ,
Life beams not for us with one ray that can cheer ;
Love and Hope upon earth bring no more consolation ,
In the grave is our hope , for in life is our fear .
Oh ! when , my ador 'd , in the tomb will they place me ,
Since , in life , love and friendship for ever are fled ?
If again in the mansion of death I embrace thee ,
Perhaps they will leave unmolested — the dead .
<2083>
When I hear you express an affection so warm ,
Ne'er think , my belov 'd , that I do not believe ;
For your lip would the soul of suspicion disarm ,
And your eye beams a ray which can never deceive .
Yet still , this fond bosom regrets , while adoring ,
That love , like the leaf , must fall into the sear ,
That Age will come on , when Remembrance , deploring ,
Contemplates the scenes of her youth , with a tear ;
That the time must arrive , when , no longer retaining
Their auburn , those locks must wave thin to the breeze ,
When a few silver hairs of those tresses remaining ,
Prove nature a prey to decay and disease .
Tis this , my belov 'd , which spreads gloom o'er my features ,
Though I ne'er shall presume to arraign the decree
Which God has proclaim 'd as the fate of his creatures ,
In the death which one day will deprive you of me . [ i ]
Mistake not , sweet sceptic , the cause of emotion , [ ii ]
No doubt can the mind of your lover invade ;
He worships each look with such faithful devotion ,
A smile can enchant , or a tear can dissuade .
But as death , my belov 'd , soon or late shall o'ertake us ,
And our breasts , which alive with such sympathy glow ,
Will sleep in the grave , till the blast shall awake us ,
When calling the dead , in Earth 's bosom laid low .
Oh ! then let us drain , while we may , draughts of pleasure ,
Which from passion , like ours , must unceasingly flow ; [ iii ]
Let us pass round the cup of Love 's bliss in full measure ,
And quaff the contents as our nectar below .
<2084>
Ye scenes of my childhood , whose lov 'd recollection
Embitters the present , compar 'd with the past ;
Where science first dawn 'd on the powers of reflection ,
And friendships were form 'd , too romantic to last ;[ 2 ]
Where fancy , yet , joys to retrace the resemblance
Of comrades , in friendship and mischief allied ;[ 3 ]
How welcome to me your ne'er fading remembrance , [ i ]
Which rests in the bosom , though hope is deny 'd !
Again I revisit the hills where we sported ,
The streams where we swam , and the fields where we fought ;[ 4 ]
The school where , loud warn 'd by the bell , we resorted ,
To pore o'er the precepts by Pedagogues taught .
Again I behold where for hours I have ponder 'd ,
As reclining , at eve , on yon tombstone[ 5 ]I lay ;
Or round the steep brow of the churchyard I wander 'd ,
To catch the last gleam of the sun 's setting ray .
I once more view the room , with spectators surrounded ,
Where , as Zanga ,[ 6 ]I trod on Alonzo o'erthrown ;
While , to swell my young pride , such applauses resounded ,
I fancied that Mossop[ 7 ]himself was outshone .
Or , as Lear , I pour 'd forth the deep imprecation ,
By my daughters , of kingdom and reason depriv 'd ;
Till , fir 'd by loud plaudits and self-adulation ,
I regarded myself as a Garrick reviv 'd . [ ii ]
Ye dreams of my boyhood , how much I regret you !
Unfaded your memory dwells in my breast ; [ iii ]
Though sad and deserted , I ne'er can forget you :
Your pleasures may still be in fancy possest .
To Ida full oft may remembrance restore me , [ iv ]
While Fate shall the shades of the future unroll !
Since Darkness o'ershadows the prospect before me ,
More dear is the beam of the past to my soul !
But if , through the course of the years which await me ,
Some new scene of pleasure should open to view ,
I will say , while with rapture the thought shall elate me ,
“ Oh ! such were the days which my infancy knew . ”[ 8 ]
<2104>
Away , ye gay landscapes , ye gardens of roses !
In you let the minions of luxury rove :
Restore me the rocks , where the snow-flake reposes ,
Though still they are sacred to freedom and love :
Yet , Caledonia , belov 'd are thy mountains ,
Round their white summits though elements war :
Though cataracts foam ‘ stead of smooth-flowing fountains ,
I sigh for the valley of dark Loch na Garr .
Ah ! there my young footsteps in infancy , wander 'd :
My cap was the bonnet , my cloak was the plaid ;[ 2 ]
On chieftains , long perish 'd , my memory ponder 'd ,
As daily I strode through the pine-cover 'd glade ;
I sought not my home , till the day 's dying glory
Gave place to the rays of the bright polar star ;
For fancy was cheer 'd , by traditional story ,
Disclos 'd by the natives of dark Loch na Garr .
“ Shades of the dead ! have I not heard your voices
Rise on the night-rolling breath of the gale ? ”
Surely , the soul of the hero rejoices ,
And rides on the wind , o'er his own Highland vale !
Round Loch na Garr , while the stormy mist gathers ,
Winter presides in his cold icy car :
Clouds , there , encircle the forms of my Fathers ;
They dwell in the tempests of dark Loch na Garr .
“ Ill starr 'd ,[ 3 ]though brave , did no visions foreboding
Tell you that fate had forsaken your cause ? ”
Ah ! were you destined to die at Culloden ,[ 4 ]
Victory crown 'd not your fall with applause :
Still were you happy , in death 's earthy slumber ,
You rest with your clan , in the caves of Braemar ;[ 5 ]
The Pibroch[ 6 ]resounds , to the piper 's loud number ,
Your deeds , on the echoes of dark Loch na Garr .
Years have roll 'd on , Loch na Garr , since I left you ,
Years must elapse , ere I tread you again :
Nature of verdure and flowers has bereft you ,
Yet still are you dearer than Albion 's plain :
England ! thy beauties are tame and domestic ,
To one who has rov 'd on the mountains afar :
Oh ! for the crags that are wild and majestic ,
The steep , frowning glories of dark Loch na Garr .[ 7 ]
<2106>
When I rov 'd a young Highlander o'er the dark heath ,
And climb 'd thy steep summit , oh Morven of snow ![ 1 ]
To gaze on the torrent that thunder 'd beneath ,
Or the mist of the tempest that gather 'd below ;[ 2 ]
Untutor 'd by science , a stranger to fear ,
And rude as the rocks , where my infancy grew ,
No feeling , save one , to my bosom was dear ;
Need I say , my sweet Mary ,[ 3 ]‘ twas centred in you ?
Yet it could not be Love , for I knew not the name ,—
What passion can dwell in the heart of a child ?
But , still , I perceive an emotion the same
As I felt , when a boy , on the crag-cover 'd wild :
One image , alone , on my bosom impress 'd ,
I lov 'd my bleak regions , nor panted for new ;
And few were my wants , for my wishes were bless 'd ,
And pure were my thoughts , for my soul was with you .
I arose with the dawn , with my dog as my guide ,
From mountain to mountain I bounded along ;
I breasted[ 4 ]the billows of Dee 's[ 5 ]rushing tide ,
And heard at a distance the Highlander 's song :
At eve , on my heath-cover 'd couch of repose .
No dreams , save of Mary , were spread to my view ;
And warm to the skies my devotions arose ,
For the first of my prayers was a blessing on you .
I left my bleak home , and my visions are gone ;
The mountains are vanish 'd , my youth is no more ;
As the last of my race , I must wither alone ,
And delight but in days , I have witness 'd before :
Ah ! splendour has rais 'd , but embitter 'd my lot ;
More dear were the scenes which my infancy knew :
Though my hopes may have fail 'd , yet they are not forgot ,
Though cold is my heart , still it lingers with you .
When I see some dark hill point its crest to the sky ,
I think of the rocks that o'ershadow Colbleen ;[ 6 ]
When I see the soft blue of a love-speaking eye ,
I think of those eyes that endear 'd the rude scene ;
When , haply , some light-waving locks I behold ,
That faintly resemble my Mary 's in hue ,
I think on the long flowing ringlets of gold ,
The locks that were sacred to beauty , and you .
Yet the day may arrive , when the mountains once more
Shall rise to my sight , in their mantles of snow ;
But while these soar above me , unchang 'd as before ,
Will Mary be there to receive me ?— ah , no !
Adieu , then , ye hills , where my childhood was bred !
Thou sweet flowing Dee , to thy waters adieu !
No home in the forest shall shelter my head ,—
Ah ! Mary , what home could be mine , but with you ?
<2119>
Oh , Anne , your offences to me have been grievous :
I thought from my wrath no atonement could save you ;
But Woman is made to command and deceive us —
I look 'd in your face , and I almost forgave you .
I vow 'd I could ne'er for a moment respect you ,
Yet thought that a day 's separation was long ;
When we met , I determined again to suspect you —
Your smile soon convinced me suspicion was wrong .
I swore , in a transport of young indignation ,
With fervent contempt evermore to disdain you :
I saw you — my anger became admiration ;
And now , all my wish , all my hope 's to regain you .
With beauty like yours , oh , how vain the contention !
Thus lowly I sue for forgiveness before you ;—
At once to conclude such a fruitless dissension ,
Be false , my sweet Anne , when I cease to adore you !
<2120>
Oh say not , sweet Anne , that the Fates have decreed
The heart which adores you should wish to dissever ;
Such Fates were to me most unkind ones indeed ,—
To bear me from Love and from Beauty for ever .
Your frowns , lovely girl , are the Fates which alone
Could bid me from fond admiration refrain ;
By these , every hope , every wish were o'erthrown ,
Till smiles should restore me to rapture again .
As the ivy and oak , in the forest entwin 'd ,
The rage of the tempest united must weather ;
My love and my life were by nature design 'd
To flourish alike , or to perish together .
Then say not , sweet Anne , that the Fates have decreed
Your lover should bid you a lasting adieu :
Till Fate can ordain that his bosom shall bleed ,
His Soul , his Existence , are centred in you .
<2138>
Fill the goblet again ! for I never before
Felt the glow which now gladdens my heart to its core ;
Let us drink !— who would not ?— since , through life 's varied round ,
In the goblet alone no deception is found .
I have tried in its turn all that life can supply ;
I have bask 'd in the beam of a dark rolling eye ;
I have lov 'd !— who has not ?— but what heart can declare
That Pleasure existed while Passion was there ?
In the days of my youth , when the heart 's in its spring ,
And dreams that Affection can never take wing ,
I had friends !— who has not ?— but what tongue will avow ,
That friends , rosy wine ! are so faithful as thou ?
The heart of a mistress some boy may estrange ,
Friendship shifts with the sunbeam — thou never canst change ;
Thou grow'st old — who does not ?— but on earth what appears ,
Whose virtues , like thine , still increase with its years ?
Yet if blest to the utmost that Love can bestow ,
Should a rival bow down to our idol below ,
We are jealous !— who 's not ?— thou hast no such alloy ;
For the more that enjoy thee , the more we enjoy .
Then the season of youth and its vanities past ,
For refuge we fly to the goblet at last ;
There we find — do we not ?— in the flow of the soul ,
That truth , as of yore , is confined to the bowl .
When the box of Pandora was open 'd on earth ,
And Misery 's triumph commenc 'd over Mirth ,
Hope was left ,— was she not ?— but the goblet we kiss ,
And care not for Hope , who are certain of bliss .
Long life to the grape ! for when summer is flown ,
The age of our nectar shall gladden our own :
We must die — who shall not ?— May our sins be forgiven ,
And Hebe shall never be idle in Heaven .
<2610>
Good is the sea , your complaining you squander ,
Freedom and joy on the sea flourish best ;
He never knoweth effeminate rest ,
Who on the billows delighteth to wander .
When I am old , to the green growing land
I too will cling , with the grass for my pillow ;
Now I will drink and will fight with free hand ,
Now I 'll enjoy my own sorrow-free billow .
Now hath the ice indeed chased us to land ,
Close round our keel are the stiffened waves dozing ;
Let me not waste the long winter reposing
Here among rocks on this desolate strand .
Let me once more keep the Yule banquet olden ,
Guest of king Ring and the bride of my choice ;
Let me once more see those waving locks golden ,
Hear the sweet tones of that well-beloved voice .
<2611>
Good ! to king Ring it shall be my glad duty ,
Something to teach of a wronged viking 's power ;
Fire we the palace at midnight 's still hour ,
Scorch the old graybeard and bear off the beauty .
Or , being viking you may think it right
Honor to grant the old man by a duel :
Challenge him out on the ice for a fight ,—
Whatever you will , only waiting is cruel .
Speak not of firebrands , to war give no thought ,—
Peace would I bear to the king , and not terror ;
Ring nor his partner committed the error —
Heavenly vengeance my punishment sought ,
Little of hope is now left worth the telling ,
Only farewell would I take of my dear ,—
Final farewell . When the green buds are swelling ,
Sooner it may be , you 'll see Fridthjof here .
<2612>
Fridthjof , ‘ tis time for your folly 's abating ;
Sigh and lament for a false woman 's loss !
Earth is , alas , but too full of such dross ;
One may be lost , still a thousand are waiting .
Say but the word , of such goods I will bring
Quickly a cargo ,— the Southland can spare them ,
Red as the rose , mild as lambs in the Spring ;
Then we 'll cast lots , or as brothers we 'll share them .
Bjorn , you 're as frank and as joyous as Frey ,
Bold to wage war and with wisdom advising ;
Odin and Thor you ne'er think of despising ,—
Freyja , the heavenly , you dare to gainsay .
Let us not question her power supernal ,
Rather beware lest we waken her ire ;
Once , though now slumbering , the sparkle eternal
Mortals and gods shall enkindle to fire .
<2613>
Go not alone , lest return be prevented .
Singly I go not , my sword goes with me .
<2614>
Hagbert , remember , was hanged to a tree .
Who can be taken , to hang has consented .
<2615>
Fallest thou then , on thy murderer fell
Carve I the blood-eagle , vengeance bestowing .
Needless , fond Bjorn , he 'll not hear the cock crowing
Longer than I do . Farewell , fare thee well .
<2618>
Through the cracks in these battlements loud the winds whistle ,
For the hall of my fathers is gone to decay ;
And in yon once gay garden the hemlock and thistle
Have choak 'd up the rose , which late bloom 'd in the way .
Of the barons of old , who once proudly to battle
Led their vassals from Europe to Palestine 's plain ;
The escutcheon and shield , which with ev'ry blast rattle ,
Are the only sad vestiges now that remain .
No more does old Robert , with harp-stringing numbers ,
Raise a flame in the breast , for the war laurell 'd wreath ,
Near Askalon 's Towers John of Horiston[ 1 ]slumbers ,
Unnerv 'd is the hand of his minstrel by death .
Paul and Hubert too sleep in the valley of Cressy ,
For the safety of Edward and ENGLAND they fell ,
My fathers ! the tears of your country redress ye ,
How you fought ! how you died ! still her annals can tell .
On[ 2 ]Marston with Rupert[ 3 ]‘ gainst traitors contending ,
Four Brothers enrich 'd with their blood the bleak field
For Charles the Martyr their country defending ,
Till death their attachment to royalty scal 'd .
Shades of heroes farewell ! your descendant departing ,
From the seat of his ancestors , bids ye adieu !
Abroad , or at home , your remembrance imparting
New courage , he 'll think upon glory , and you .
Though a tear dims his eye at this sad separation ,
‘ Tis nature , not fear , which commands his regret ;
Far distant he goes with the same emulation ,
In the grave , he alone can his fathers forget .
Your fame , and your memory , still will he cherish ,
He vows that he ne'er will disgrace your renown ;
Like you will he live , or like you will he perish ,
When decay 'd , may he mingle his dust with your own .
<2700>
Fine Port and bright Sherry , well worthy of name ,
Two Shillings per Bottle ; Madeira the same ;
Good Cape , Fifteen-pence ; and the marvel to crown ,
Champagne , Five and Sixpence , the cheapest in Town .
<2844>
By a sense of their bad reputation molested ,
The Drones in grave council assembled one day ;
And various measures each idler suggested ,
To wash of their sloth the sad stigma away .
No other expedient well could they see ,
In the eyes of all animals better to stand —
Though lazy and stupid as well they could be —
Than to try , at the making of honey , their hand .
But the labor proved very distasteful , indeed ;
The workmen , a rude , inexperienced crew ;
They began to be doubtful if they should succeed
Very well in attaining the object in view .
To get rid of their trouble they fain would contrive ,
By interring in state an old Bee that had died —
A notable Bee of a neighboring hive ,
Of all her companions the model and pride .
With pomp and with honor they lauded her name ,
In funeral obsequies , brilliant and grand ;
Panegyrics immortal they buzzed to her fame ,
For the whitest of wax and honey so bland .
This done , with much self-satisfaction they stop .
But a Bee said in scorn , “ Is this all you can do ?
Of the honey I make , not one single drop
Would I give for the fuss of your beggarly crew . ”
How many there are , who their emptiness mask ,
By quoting wise words from the lips of the dead !
But with all their pretence , did they ever , I ask ,
Produce any such from their own shallow head ?
<2847>
In a certain cathedral a huge bell there hung ,
That only on solemn occasions was rung ;
Its echoes majestic , by strokes three or four ,
Now and then , in grave cadence , were heard — never more .
For this stately reserve and its wonderful weight ,
Throughout the whole parish , its glory was great .
In the district the city held under its sway ,
Of a few wretched rustics , a hamlet there lay ;
And a poor little church , with a belfry so small ,
That you hardly would call it a belfry at all .
There a little cracked cow-bell , that in it was swinging ,
For the poor little neighborhood did all the ringing .
Now that this little belfry might ape in renown
The cathedral 's huge tower , that loomed up o'er the town ;
That briefly and seldom — on festivals noted —
The said little bell should be rung — it was voted .
By this cunning device , in their rustical eyes ,
Its tinkle soon passed for a bell of great size .
Of true merit and excellence , many men try ,
By grave airs and long faces , the place to supply ;
And think that their wisdom is surely inferred
From their seldom vouchsafing to utter a word .
Indeed , it is true , in a general way ,
Asses may not be known if they never should bray ,
And for a wise animal safely may pass ;
If one opens his mouth , then we know he 's an ass .
<2861>
At telling of rabies old Esop was grand ;
With his subtile invention , his wisdom so great .
And a story of his , as I have it at hand ,
Into our own language I now will translate .
“ It is plain , ” said a Rat , at the mouth of his hole ,
“ No distinction more lovely and noble is found
Than fidelity . Therefore it is , on my soul ,
I love and respect the generous Hound . ”
A Cat answered , hard by : “ This quality fine
I assure you is also a merit of mine . ” —
“ Ah ! what 's that ? ” said the Rat , as , in terrible fright
He sprang to his hole , and , when safe out of sight ,
Just poking his nose out , he coolly did call :
“ You boast of it , hey ? I do n't like it at all . ”
The honor which many would freely allow ,
They retract , when it lights on an enemy 's brow .
Now what say you , my reader ? “ The fable is one
Which delights and instructs . It is perfectly done .
Esop had , in these things , a way of his own . ”
Ah ! but look , my good sir ; from this noddle of mine
It all came . Your friend Esop wrote never a line —
Of the whole .— “ Ah , indeed ! Then the fable is thine ? ”
Yes it is , learned man ; and I ween you 'll not fail .
Being mine , to attack it with tooth and with nail .
<2876>
A spreading contagion , defacing our tongue
With phrases outlandish , our critics bemoan .
But some fools have their notions of purity hung
Upon obsolete terms superseding our own .
Living words they despise as a vulgar intrusion ,
And forgotten ones rake from oblivion 's gloom .
For a word of advice on such stupid conclusion ,
In phrase like their own , we here must find room ;
In two dialects , jostling in motley confusion .
Of our own times a Painter — who jealousy felt
That some portraits antique , of a day long bygone
From the connoisseurs won both lauding and gelt —
Determined to make some antiques of his own .
So essaying , one day , the portrait to limn
Of a certain rich man , in high estimate held ,
He deemed that a dress of antiquity grim
Would give to his limning the impress of eld .
For a second Velasquez he counted to stand —
When the traits of the sitter , to perfect content ,
Having deftly depicted — with grave collar and band ,
And glittering gauds , he a costume besprent
That had figured , whilom , as stately and grand .
To his patron the work he carries with speed .
He , his form thus yclad with wonderment saw ;
By such odd gear full sorely astounded , I rede ,—
Though the face of the portrait showed dainty and braw .
This antick his patron , to quip him , devised —
The Painter a guerdon to grant , to his gree — In
a chest , as heir-loom from his ancestry prized ,
Some old coins had been lying for centuries three ;
Of the first of the Charles ’ and fifth Ferdinand ,
Of Philip the second and Philip the third :
A purse full of these he placed in the hand
Of the Painter abashed — but ne'er said a word .
“ With these coin — or , as certes , I rather might say —
These medals , to market if I chance for to his , ” —
Quoth our limner ,— “ when victuals I needed , I pray ,
How , with such , could I chaffer my cheer to supply ?
“ But sith , ” said the other , “ you 've pranked me out there
In a guise , that was once brave and lordly ,— ‘ tis true ,
But which no living man but a beadle would wear ;
As you ‘ ve painted me , so I have paid you .
Take your picture again , and paint round my throat
A cravat , instead of that collar and band — Yon
satin slashed doublet exchange for my coat ,
And my rapier , too , for that basket-hilt brand ;
Not one , in the city 's whole compass , there is
Who , in trappings like these , would guess at my phiz .
Paint me like myself , and the price I 'll lay down
In good money , current in country or town . ”
Hold , now . If we laugh at the farcical notion
Of this modern Painter , and deem it so droll ,
Why may we not laugh at the Author 's devotion ,
His ideas who drapes in antiquity 's stole ;—
Who shocks us with phrases all mouldy with age ;
Thinks oddity graceful ;— and purity 's self
Considers his style , when he darkens his page
With expressions forgotten and laid on the shelf ;—
And believes that no term by pure taste is forbid ,
If it only were good in the time of the Cid ?
<2901>
In Madrid , there was a rich man — and , they say ,
That ten times as stupid , as rich , he was too ;—
Whose magnificent mansion made ample display
Of furniture gorgeous and costly and new .
“ It vexes me much , that a house so complete , ” —
To this wealthy dolt , said a neighbor one day ,—
“ Should a Library lack ,— an ornament great ,—
So useful and elegant , too , by the way . ”
“ To be sure , ” said the other , “ how strange that the case
To me never occurred ; I 'll supply the want soon .
There is time enough yet ; and , in the first place ,
I devote to the purpose the northern saloon .
Send a cabinet-maker to put up some shelves ,
Capacious , well finished ,— no matter for cost ,
Then , in buying some books , we will busy ourselves ;—
To make it all perfect , no time shall be lost . ”
The cases are done ; the owner he comes ,
Inspects and approves : “ And now , ” — said the snob ,—
“ I must go out and look up some twelve thousand tomes .
‘ Pon my honor , ‘ twill be a pretty good job .
I am almost discouraged — of money a deal
It will take ; and ‘ tis work for a century , too .
Will it not be much better the cases to fill ,
With books made of pasteboard , as good to the view ?
Just think now — why not ? A painter I know ,
For such little jobs precisely the man ;
Can write titles out fair , and make pasteboard to show
Like leather or parchment , if any one can . ”
And now to the work ,— books precious and rare ,
Both modern and ancient , he caused to be painted ;
And , besides printed volumes , he also takes care
To have manuscripts , too , in same guise represented .
The precious old fool then , each day , set apart
Some hours to wander his library round ;
Till , learning the titles of many by heart ,
He thought himself grown to a scholar profound .
Truly , what better needs the student ,— contented
Of books , nothing more than their titles , to know
Than to own a collection right skilfully painted ,
Of genuine volumes presenting the show ?
<2915>
Poor Martha is old , and her hair is turn 'd grey ,
And her hearing has left her for many a year ;
Ten to one if she knows what it is that you say ,
Though she puts her poor wither 'd hand close to her ear
I 've seen naughty children run after her fast ,
And cry , “ Martha , run , there 's a bullock so bold ; ”
And when she was frighten 'd ,— laugh at her at last ,
Because she believed the sad stories they told .
I 've seen others put their mouths close to her ear ,
And make signs as if they had something to say ;
And when she said , “ Master , I 'm deaf , and can n't hear , ”
Point at her and mock her , and scamper away .
Ah ! wicked the children poor Martha to tease ,
As if she had not enough else to endure ;
They rather should try her affliction to ease ,
And soothe a disorder that nothing can cure .
One day , when those children themselves are grown old ,
And one may be deaf , and another be lame ,
Perhaps they may find that some children , as bold ,
May tease them , and mock them , and serve them the same .
Then , when they reflect on the days of their youth ,
A faithful account will their consciences keep ,
And teach them , with shame and with sorrow , the truth ,
That “ what a man soweth , the same shall he reap . ”
<2922>
There were two little girls , neither handsome nor plain ;
One 's name was Eliza , the other 's was Jane :
They were both of one height , as I 've heard people say ,
They were both of one age , I believe , to a day .
‘ Twas fancied by some , who but slightly had seen them ,
That scarcely a difference was there between them ;
But no one for long in this notion persisted ,
So great a distinction there really existed .
Eliza knew well that she could not be pleasing ,
While fretting and fuming , while sulky or teasing ;
And therefore in company artfully tried ,
Not to break her bad habits , but only to hide .
So , when she was out , with much labour and pain ,
She contrived to look almost as pleasant as Jane ;
But then you might see , that in forcing a smile ,
Her mouth was uneasy , and ached all the while .
And in spite of her care , it would sometimes befall ,
That some cross event happen 'd to ruin it all ;
And because it might chance that her share was the worst ,
Her temper broke loose , and her dimples dispersed .
But Jane , who had nothing she wanted to hide ,
And therefore these troublesome arts never tried ,
Had none of the care and fatigue of concealing ,
But her face always show 'd what her bosom was feeling .
At home or abroad there was peace in her smile ,
A cheerful good nature that needed no guile .
And Eliza work 'd hard , but could never obtain
The affection that freely was given to Jane .
<2931>
What is it that makes little Emily cry ?
Come then , let mamma wipe the tear from her eye :
There — lay down your head on my bosom — that 's right ,
And now tell mamma what 's the matter to-night .
What ! Emmy is sleepy , and tired with play ?
Come , Betty , make haste then , and fetch her away ;
But do not be fretful , my darling ; you know
Mamma cannot love little girls that are so .
She shall soon go to bed and forget it all there —
Ah ! here 's her sweet smile come again , I declare :
That 's right , for I thought you quite naughty before .
Good night , my dear child , but do n't fret any more .
<2934>
In an elegant frock , trimm 'd with beautiful lace ,
And hair nicely curl 'd , hanging over her face ,
Young Fanny went out to the house of a friend ,
With a large little party the evening to spend .
“ Ah ! how they will all be delighted , I guess ,
And stare with surprise at my handsome new dress ! ”
Thus said the vain girl , and her little heart beat ,
Impatient the happy young party to meet .
But , alas ! they were all too intent on their play
To observe the fine clothes of this lady so gay ,
And thus all her trouble quite lost its design ;—
For they saw she was proud , but forgot she was fine .
‘ Twas Lucy , though only in simple white clad ,
( Nor trimmings , nor laces , nor jewels , she had ,)
Whose cheerful good-nature delighted them more
Than Fanny and all the fine garments she wore .
‘ Tis better to have a sweet smile on one 's face ,
Than to wear a fine frock with an elegant lace ,
For the good-natured girl is loved best in the main ,
If her dress is but decent , though ever so plain .
<2967>
The poor man is old ,
He is hungry and cold ,
Let us give him some bread to eat ;
Let him come to the fire ,
Let us build it up higher ,
Let us give the poor man a warm seat .
The poor man is weak ;
How pale is his cheek !
Perhaps he has met with some sorrow ;
Let us give him a bed ,
Where his poor weary head
May rest , and feel better to-morrow .
<5986>
I have the honour to be ,
Good Sir , yours sincerely ,
<9691>
This is a spray the bird clung to ,
Making it blossom with pleasure ,
Ere the high tree-top she sprung to ,
Fit for her nest and her treasure .
Oh , what a hope beyond measure
Was the poor spray 's , which the flying feet hung to ,—
So to be singled out , built in , and sung to !
This is a heart the Queen leant on ,
Thrilled in a minute erratic ,
Ere the true bosom she bent on , 
Meet for love 's regal dalmatic .° ° 
Oh , what a fancy ecstatic
Was the poor heart 's , ere the wanderer went on —
Love to be saved for it , proffered to , spent on !
<16804>
Free as the wind when the heart of the twilight is stirred
Eastward , and sounds from the springs of the sunrise are heard :
Free — and we know not another as infinite word .
Darkness or twilight or sunlight may compass us round ,
Hate may arise up against us , or hope may confound ;
Love may forsake us ; yet may not the spirit be bound .
Free in oppression of grief as in ardour of joy
Still may the soul be , and each to her strength as a toy :
Free in the glance of the man as the smile of the boy .
Freedom alone is the salt and the spirit that gives
Life , and without her is nothing that verily lives :
Death cannot slay her : she laughs upon death and forgives .
Brightest and hardiest of roses anear and afar
Glitters the blithe little face of you , round as a star :
Liberty bless you and keep you to be as you are .
England and liberty bless you and keep you to be
Worthy the name of their child and the sight of their sea :
Fear not at all ; for a slave , if he fears not , is free .
<22489>
Light of the World , what are violets but eyes of you ,
Perfume , your hair blowing back on the breeze ,
Ah , but the fugitive dainty surprise of you ,
Pricking in green on the blossomy trees .
Give me the sun of your smile to be fire to me ,
Give me the moon when the passion is gone ,
Give me the light to be dream and desire to me
Down the dark alleys that lead to the dawn .
<22490>
You are the dawning of dreams .
You are the end of desire .
You are the gladness and glory that seems
Dauntless , to urge and aspire .
Cradle my soul on your wings ,
Cradle my head on your breast .
Teach me the ardour that conquers and sings .
Grant me your infinite rest .
<22690>
Beauty will crumble with tasking ,
Love rarely lasts for a year ,
Virtue is sold for the asking ,
Bravery fades before fear .
Youth never lives till the morrow ,
One thing of all is alive ,
Joy cannot quench it , or sorrow ,
Folly alone shall survive .
Folly , from cradle to burning ,
Toys for the great and the small ,
None shall escape her by learning —
Folly has rattles for all !
<33293>
Up goes the price of our bread —
Up goes the cost of our caking !
People must ever be fed ;
Bakers must ever be baking .
So , though our nerves may be quaking ,
Dumbly , in arrant despair ,
Pay we the crowd that is taking
All that the traffic will bear .
Costly to sleep in a bed !
Costlier yet to be waking !
Costly for one who is wed !
Ruinous for one who is raking !
Tradespeople , ducking and draking ,
Charge you as much as they dare ,
Asking , without any faking ,
All that the traffic will bear .
Roof that goes over our head ,
Thirst so expensive for slaking ,
Paper , apparel , and lead —
Why are their prices at breaking ?
Yet , though our purses be aching ,
Little the traffickers care ;
Getting , for chopping and steaking ,
All that the traffic will bear .
<6269>
THE stones in the streamlet I make my bright pillow ,
And open my arms to the swift-rolling billow ,
That lovingly hastens to fall on my breast .
Then fickleness soon bids it onwards be flowing ;
A second draws nigh , its caresses bestowing ,—
And so by a twofold enjoyment I 'm blest .
And yet thou art trailing in sorrow and sadness
The moments that life , as it flies , gave for gladness ,
<8510>
Over the borders , a sin without pardon ,
Breaking the branches and crawling below ,
Out through the breach in the wall of the garden ,
Down by the banks of the river , we go .
Here is the mill with the humming of thunder ,
Here is the weir with the wonder of foam ,
Here is the sluice with the race running under —
Marvelous places , though handy to home !
Sounds of the village grow stiller and stiller ,
Stiller the note of the birds on the hill ;
Dusty and dim are the eyes of the miller ,
Deaf are his ears with the moil of the mill .
Years may go by , and the wheel in the river
Wheel as it wheels for us , children , to-day .
Wheel and keep roaring and foaming for ever
Long after all of the boys are away .
Home from the Indies and home from the ocean ,
Heroes and soldiers we all shall come home ;
Still we shall find the old mill wheel in motion ,
Turning and churning that river to foam .
You with the bean that I gave when we quarreled ,
I with your marble of Saturday last ,
Honored and old and all gaily apparelled ,
Here we shall meet and remember the past .
<11146>
The doctor leaned tenderly over the bed
And looked at the patient ‘ s complexion ,
And felt of the pulse and the feverish head ,
Then stood for a time in reflection .
“ A strange complication !
My recommendation
Is morphia by hypodermic injection . ”
The patient looked up with a leer in his eye
And winked in the doctor 's direction —
“ Well , Doc , ” he remarked , “ since you say I must die ,
I 'm grateful to you for protection —
I 'm now in position
To ask the commission
T ’ excuse me from serving as judge of election . ”
<21647>
Oh , it 's down the long side of Farcalladen Rise ,
With the knees pressing hard to the saddle , my men ;
With the sparks from the hoofs giving light to the eyes ,
And our hearts beating hard as we rode to the glen !
And it 's back with the ring of the chain and the spur ,
And it 's back with the sun on the hill and the moor ,
And it 's back is the thought sets my pulses astir ,—
But I 'll never go back to Farcalladen more !
Oh , it 's down the long side of Farcalladen Rise ,
And it 's swift as an arrow and straight as a spear ,
And it 's keen as the frost when the summer-time dies ,
That we rode to the glen , and with never a fear .
And it 's hey for the hedge , and it 's hey for the wall ,
And it 's over the stream with an echoing cry ;
And there 's three fled for ever from old Donegal ,
And there 's two that have shown how bold Irishmen die !
For it 's rest when the gallop is over , my men ,
And it 's here 's to the lads that have ridden their last ;
And it 's here 's to the lasses we leave in the glen ,
With a smile for the future , a sigh for the past !
<1423>
Two steadfast Friends lived once in Monomtàpa ;
They loved as if really they 'd had the same pàpa :
What one earned the other earned . Ah ! for that land ;
It 's worth ten such countries as ours , understand .
One night , when a deep sleep had fallen on all ,
And the sun had gone off in the dark , beyond call ,
One of these worthy men , woke by a nightmare ,
Ran to his friend , in a shiver , and quite bare .
The other at once takes his purse and his sword ,
Accosts his companion , and says , “ ‘ Pon my word
You seldom are up when all other men snore ;
You make better use of the night than to pore
Over books ; but come , tell me , you 're ruined at play ,
Or you have quarrelled with some one ; now , speak out , I say .
Here 's my sword and my purse ; or , if eager to rest
On a fond wife 's compassionate , fondling breast ,
Take this slave : she is fair . ” “ No , no , ” said the other ,
“ ‘ Twas neither of these things that startled me , brother .
Thanks , thanks for your zeal ; ‘ twas a dream that I had :
I saw you appear to me , looking so sad ;
I feared you were ill , and ran to you to see :
‘ Twas that dream , so detestable , brought me to thee . ”
Which friend loved the most ?— come , reader , speak out !
The question is hard , and leaves matter for doubt .
A true friend is choicest of treasures indeed ;
In the depths of your heart he will see what you need :
He 'll spare you the pain to disclose woes yourself ,
Indifferent to either his trouble or pelf :
A dream , when he loves , or a trifle — mere air —
Will strike him with terror , lest danger be there .
<1445>
Bertrand and Raton — a Monkey and Cat —
Were messmates in mischief , with roguery fat ;
There was nothing they feared , there was nothing they spared ,
And whatever they plundered they usually shared .
If anything close by was stealable , they
Would never go foraging out of their way .
Bertrand stole everything Raton to please ,
And Raton cared less for the mice than the cheese .
One day at the fire , when all clear was the coast ,
The pair were both spying some chesnuts at roast :
To steal a good meal is its pleasure to double ;
Besides , it would bring the cook 's man into trouble .
Says Bertrand to Raton , “ My brother , you see ,
Fate 's given a moment of glory to thee ;
Get those chesnuts , and quickly , my brave one , I pray ,
The gods have vouchsafed us a dinner to-day . ”
And so to snatch chesnuts poor Raton agreed ,
And at once set to work on the dangerous deed .
With gingerly touch he the cinders withdrew ,
And snatched the hot prizes , first one , and then two .
He has pilfered quite half , but has not eaten one ;
The eating his comrade , Bertrand , has done .
A scullion comes — there 's adieu to the theft —
And Raton is empty and querulous left .
Your nobles are much in a similar case ,
Who as flatterers dangerous service embrace ;
And to gratify kings , fingers often will burn ,
Then homeward , though wiser , still poorer return .
<1626>
In reading your letter alone in my hackney ,
Your damnable riddle my poor brains did rack nigh .
And when with much labour the matter I crack 'd ,
I found you mistaken in matter of fact .
A woman 's no sieve , ( for with that you begin ,)
Because she lets out more than e'er she takes in .
And that she 's a riddle can never be right ,
For a riddle is dark , but a woman is light .
But grant her a sieve , I can say something archer ;
Pray what is a man ? he 's a fine linen searcher .
Now tell me a thing that wants interpretation ,
What name for a maid ,[ 1 ]was the first man 's damnation ?
If your worship will please to explain me this rebus ,
I swear from henceforward you shall be my Phoebus .
<2189>
Dear ***, I am writing , not to you , but at you ,
For the feet of you tourists have no resting-place ;
But wherever with this the mail-pigeon may catch you ,
May she find you with gayety 's smile on your face ;
Whether chasing a snipe at the Falls of Cohoes ,
Or chased by the snakes upon Anthony 's Nose ;
Whether wandering , at Catskill , from Hotel to Clove ,
Making sketches , or speeches , puns , poems , or love ;
Or in old Saratoga 's unknown fountain-land ,
Threading groves of enchantment , half bushes , half sand ;
Whether dancing on Sundays , at Lebanon Springs ,
With those Madame Hutins of religion , the Shakers ;
Or , on Tuesdays , with maidens who seek wedding rings
At Ballston , as taught by mammas and match-makers ;
Whether sailing St. Lawrence , with unbroken neck ,
From her thousand green isles to her castled Quebec ;
Or sketching Niagara , pencil on knee
( The giant of waters , our country 's pet lion ) ,
Or dipp 'd at Long Branch , in the real salt sea ,
With a cork for a dolphin , a Cockney Arion ;
Whether roaming earth , ocean , or even the air ,
Like Dan O'Rourke ' s eagle — good luck to you there .
For myself , as you 'll see by the date of my letter ,
I 'm in town , but of that fact the least said the better ;
For ‘ tis vain to deny ( though the city o'erflows
With well-dressed men and women , whom nobody knows )
That one rarely sees persons whose nod is an honour ,
A lady with fashion 's own impress upon her ;
Or a gentleman bless 'd with the courage to say ,
Like Morris ( the Prince Regent 's friend , in his day ) ,
“ Let others in sweet shady solitudes dwell ,
Oh ! give me the sweet shady side of Pall Mall . ”
Apropos — our friend A. chanced this morning to meet
The accomplish 'd Miss B. as he pass 'd Contoit 's Garden ,
Both in town in July !— he cross 'd over the street ,
And she enter 'd the rouge-shop of Mrs. St. Martin .
Resolved not to look at another known face ,
Through Leonard and Church streets she walked to Park Place ,
And he turn 'd from Broadway into Catharine-lane ,
And coursed , to avoid her , through alley and by-street ,
Till they met , as the devil would have it , again ,
Face to face , near the pump at the corner of Dey-st .
Yet , as most of “ The Fashion ” are journeying now ,
With the brown hues of summer on cheek and on brow ,
The few “ gens comme il faut ” who are lingering here ,
Are , like fruits out of season , more welcome and dear .
Like “ the last rose of summer , left blooming alone , ”
Or the last snows of winter , pure ice of haut ton ,
Unmelted , undimm 'd by the sun 's brightest ray ,
And , like diamonds , making night 's darkness seem day .
One meets them in groups , that Canova might fancy ,
At our new lounge at evening , the Opera Francais ,
In nines like the Muses , in threes like the Graces ,
Green spots in a desert of commonplace faces .
The Queen , Mrs. Adams , goes there sweetly dress 'd
In a beautiful bonnet , all golden and flowery :
While the King , Mr. Bonaparte , smiles on Celeste ,
Heloise , and Hutin , from his box at the Bowery .
For news , Parry still the North Sea is exploring ,
And the Grand Turk has taken , they say , the Acropolis ,
And we , in Swamp Place , have discover 'd , in boring ,
A mineral spring to refine the metropolis .
The day we discover 'd it was , by-the-way ,
In the life of the Cockneys , a glorious day .
For we all had been taught , by tradition and reading ,
That to gain what admits us to levees of kings ,
The gentleness , courtesy , grace of high breeding ,
The only sure way was to “ visit the Springs . ”
So the whole city visited Swamp Spring en masse ,
From attorney to sweep , from physician to paviour ,
To drink of cold water at sixpence a glass ,
And learn true politeness and genteel behaviour .
Though the crowd was immense till the hour of departure ,
No gentleman 's feelings were hurt in the rush ,
Save a grocer 's , who lost his proof-glass and bung-starter ,
And a chimney sweep 's , robb 'd of his scraper and brush .
They linger 'd till sunset and twilight had come ,
Then , wearied in limb , but much polish 'd in manners ,
The sovereign people moved gracefully home ,
In the beauty and pride of “ an army with banners . ”
As to politics — Adams and Clinton yet live ,
And reign , we presume , as we never have miss 'd ‘ em ,
And woollens and Webster continue to thrive
Under something they call the American System .
If you 're anxious to know what the country is doing ,
Whether ruin 'd already or going to ruin ,
And who her next president will be , please heaven ,
Read the letters of Jackson , the speeches of Clay ,
All the party newspapers , three columns a day ,
And Blunt 's Annual Register , year ‘ twenty-seven .
<38>
The May-pole is up ,
Now give me the cup ;
I 'll drink to the garlands around it ;
But first unto those
Whose hands did compose
The glory of flowers that crown 'd it .
A health to my girls ,
Whose husbands may earls
Or lords be , granting my wishes ,
And when that ye wed
To the bridal bed ,
Then multiply all , like to fishes .
<43>
The Hag is astride ,
This night for to ride ,
The devil and she together ;
Through thick and through thin ,
Now out , and then in ,
Though ne'er so foul be the weather .
A thorn or a bur
She takes for a spur ;
With a lash of a bramble she rides now ,
Through brakes and through briars ,
O'er ditches and mires ,
She follows the spirit that guides now .
No beast , for his food ,
Dares now range the wood ,
But hush 'd in his lair he lies lurking ;
While mischiefs , by these ,
On land and on seas ,
At noon of night are a-working .
The storm will arise ,
And trouble the skies
This night ; and , more for the wonder ,
The ghost from the tomb
Affrighted shall come ,
Call 'd out by the clap of the thunder .
<132>
Maydens , why spare ye ?
Or whether not dare ye
Correct the blind Shooter ?
Because wanton VENVS ,
So oft that doth paine vs ,
Is her Sonnes Tutor .
Now in the Spring ,
He proueth his Wing ,
The Field is his Bower ,
And as the small Bee , 
About flyeth hee ,
From Flower to Flower .
And wantonly roues ,
Abroad in the Groues ,
And in the Ayre houers ,
Which when it him deweth ,
His Fethers he meweth ,
In sighes of true Louers .
And since doom 'd by Fate ,
( That well knew his Hate ) 
That Hee should be blinde ;
For very despite ,
Our Eyes be his White ,
So wayward his kinde .
If his Shafts loosing ,
( Ill his Mark choosing )
Or his Bow broken ;
The Moane VENVS maketh ,
And care that she taketh ,
Cannot be spoken . 
To VULCAN commending
Her loue , and straight sending
Her Doues and her Sparrowes ,
With Kisses vnto him ,
And all but to woo him ,
To make her Sonne Arrowes .
Telling what he hath done ,
( Sayth she , Right mine owne Sonne )
In her Armes she him closes ,
Sweetes on him fans , 
Layd in Downe of her Swans ,
His Sheets , Leaues of Roses .
And feeds him with Kisses ;
Which oft when he misses ,
He euer is froward :
The Mothers o'rhYpppHeNioying ,
Makes by much coying ,
The Child so vntoward .
Yet in a fine Net ,
That a Spider set , 
The Maydens had caught him ;
Had she not beene neere him ,
And chanced to heare him ,
More good they had taught him .
<372>
At draw-gloves we 'll play ,
And prithee let 's lay
A wager , and let it be this :
Who first to the sum
Of twenty shall come ,
Shall have for his winning a kiss .
<448>
‘ Tis evening , my sweet ,
And dark , let us meet ;
Long time w'ave here been a-toying ,
And never , as yet ,
That season could get
Wherein t'ave had an enjoying .
For pity or shame ,
Then let not love 's flame
Be ever and ever a-spending ;
Since now to the port
The path is but short ,
And yet our way has no ending .
Time flies away fast ,
Our hours do waste ,
The while we never remember
How soon our life , here ,
Grows old with the year
That dies with the next December .
<510>
Begin with a kiss ,
Go on too with this ;
And thus , thus , thus let us smother
Our lips for awhile ,
But let 's not beguile
Our hope of one for the other .
This play , be assur 'd ,
Long enough has endur 'd ,
Since more and more is exacted ;
For Love he doth call
For his uptails all ;
And that 's the part to be acted .
<522>
Fresh strewings allow
To my sepulchre now ,
To make my lodging the sweeter ;
A staff or a wand
Put then in my hand ,
With a penny to pay S. Peter .
Who has not a cross
Must sit with the loss ,
And no whit further must venture ;
Since the porter he
Will paid have his fee ,
Or else not one there must enter .
Who at a dead lift
Ca n't send for a gift
A pig to the priest for a roaster ,
Shall hear his clerk say ,
By yea and by nay ,
No penny , no paternoster .
<574>
Now , now the mirth comes
With the cake full of plums ,
Where bean 's the king of the sport here ;
Beside we must know ,
The pea also
Must revel , as queen , in the court here .
Begin then to choose ,
This night as ye use ,
Who shall for the present delight here ,
Be a king by the lot ,
And who shall not
Be Twelfth-day queen for the night here .
Which known , let us make
Joy-sops with the cake ;
And let not a man then be seen here ,
Who unurg 'd will not drink
To the base from the brink
A health to the king and the queen here .
Next crown the bowl full
With gentle lamb 's wool :
Add sugar , nutmeg , and ginger ,
With store of ale too ;
And thus ye must do
To make the wassail a swinger .
Give then to the king
And queen wassailing :
And though with ale ye be whet here ,
Yet part ye from hence ,
As free from offence
As when ye innocent met here .
<1189>
1 Do you not know , not a fortnight ago ,
How they bragg 'd of a Western Wonder ?
When a hundred and ten slew five thousand men ,
With the help of lightning and thunder ?
2 There Hopton was slain , again and again ,
Or else my author did lie ;
With a new thanksgiving , for the dead who are living ,
To God , and his servant Chidleigh .
3 But now on which side was the miracle tried ?
I hope we at last are even ;
For Sir Ralph and his knaves are risen from their graves ,
To cudgel the clowns of Devon .
4 And there Stamford came , for his honour was lame
Of the gout three months together ;
But it proved , when they fought , but a running gout ,
For his heels were lighter than ever .
5 For now he outruns his arms and his guns ,
And leaves all his money behind him ;
But they follow after ; unless he take water ,
At Plymouth again they will find him .
6 What Reading hath cost , and Stamford hath lost ,
Goes deep in the sequestrations ;
These wounds will not heal , with your new great seal ,
Nor Jephson 's declarations .
7 Now , Peters and Case , in your prayer and grace ,
Remember the new thanksgiving ;
Isaac and his wife , now dig for your life ,
Or shortly you 'll dig for your living .
<1190>
1 You heard of that wonder , of the lightning and thunder ,
Which made the lie so much the louder :
Now list to another , that miracle 's brother ,
Which was done with a firkin of powder .
2 Oh , what a damp it struck through the camp !
But as for honest Sir Ralph ,
It blew him to the Vies without beard or eyes ,
But at least three heads and a half .
3 When out came the book , which the newsmonger took ,
From the preaching lady 's letter ,
Where in the first place , stood the conqueror 's face ,
Which made it show much the better .
4 But now , without lying , you may paint him flying ,
At Bristol they say you may find him ,
Great William the Con , so fast did he run ,
That he left half his name behind him .
5 And now came the post , save all that was lost ,
But , alas ! we are past deceiving
By a trick so stale , or else such a tale
Might amount to a new thanksgiving .
6 This made Mr. Case , with a pitiful face ,
In the pulpit to fall a weeping ,
Though his mouth utter 'd lies , truth fell from his eyes ,
Which kept the Lord Mayor from sleeping .
7 Now shut up shops , and spend your last drops ,
For the laws , not your cause , you that loathe ‘ em ,
Lest Essex should start , and play the second part
Of worshipful Sir John Hotham .
<1233>
1 When thy beauty appears ,
In its graces and airs ,
All bright as an angel new dropt from the sky ;
At distance I gaze , and am awed by my fears ,
So strangely you dazzle my eye !
2 But when without art ,
Your kind thoughts you impart ,
When your love runs in blushes through every vein ;
When it darts from your eyes , when it pants in your heart ,
Then I know you 're a woman again .
3 There 's a passion and pride
In our sex ( she replied ) ,
And thus ( might I gratify both ) I would do :
Still an angel appear to each lover beside ,
But still be a woman to you .
<1427>
With a roar and a dreadful sound ,
The Torrent dashed down the rock .
All fled from its mighty bound ;
And horror followed the shock ,
Shaking the fields around .
No Traveller dared essay
To cross the Torrent , save one ,
Who , meeting thieves by the way ,
And , finding all chances gone ,
Rode straight through the foam and spray .
No depth ! All menace and din !
The Traveller drew his breath
With courage , and laughed within
Himself at escape from death ;
But the thieves resolved to win .
His path they pursue and keep ,
Till he comes to a River clear ,
Peaceful and tranquil as sleep ,
And as far removed from fear :
Its banks are in no way steep .
But pure and glistening sand
Border the placid wave ;
He leaves the dangerous land ,
To find a treacherous grave :
It was deep , you 'll understand .
He drinks of the awful Styx ,
For deepest waters are still .
Beware of quiet men 's tricks ;
But for noisy men — they will
Battle with words , not sticks .
<1535>
Once on a time , as old stories rehearse ,
A friar would need show his talent in Latin ;
But was sorely put to ‘ t in the midst of a verse ,
Because he could find no word to come pat in ;
Then all in the place
He left a void space ,
And so went to bed in a desperate case :
When behold the next morning a wonderful riddle !
He found it was strangely fill 'd up in the middle .
Let censuring critics then think what they list o n't ;
Who would not write verses with such an assistant ?
This put me the friar into an amazement ;
For he wisely consider 'd it must be a sprite ;
That he came through the keyhole , or in at the casement ;
And it needs must be one that could both read and write ;
Yet he did not know ,
If it were friend or foe ,
Or whether it came from above or below ;
Howe'er , it was civil , in angel or elf ,
For he ne'er could have fill 'd it so well of himself .
Even so Master Doctor had puzzled his brains
In making a ballad , but was at a stand ;
He had mixt little wit with a great deal of pains ,
When he found a new help from invisible hand .
Then , good Doctor Swift
Pay thanks for the gift ,
For you freely must own you were at a dead lift ;
And , though some malicious young spirit did do't ,
You may know by the hand it had no cloven foot .
<1568>
Grave Dean of St. Patrick 's , how comes it to pass ,
That you , who know music no more than an ass ,
That you who so lately were writing of drapiers ,
Should lend your cathedral to players and scrapers ?
To act such an opera once in a year ,
So offensive to every true Protestant ear ,
With trumpets , and fiddles , and organs , and singing ,
Will sure the Pretender and Popery bring in ,
No Protestant Prelate , his lordship or grace ,
Durst there show his right , or most reverend face :
How would it pollute their crosiers and rochets ,
To listen to minims , and quavers , and crochets !
<1596>
My dear Irish folks ,
Come leave off your jokes ,
And buy up my halfpence so fine ;
So fair and so bright
They 'll give you delight ;
Observe how they glisten and shine !
They 'll sell to my grief
As cheap as neck-beef ,
For counters at cards to your wife ;
And every day
Your children may play
Span-farthing or toss on the knife .
Come hither and try ,
I 'll teach you to buy
A pot of good ale for a farthing ;
Come , threepence a score ,
I ask you no more ,
And a fig for the Drapier and Harding .[ 1 ]
When tradesmen have gold ,
The thief will be bold ,
By day and by night for to rob him :
My copper is such ,
No robber will touch ,
And so you may daintily bob him .
The little blackguard
Who gets very hard
His halfpence for cleaning your shoes :
When his pockets are cramm 'd
With mine , and be d — d ,
He may swear he has nothing to lose .
Here 's halfpence in plenty ,
For one you 'll have twenty ,
Though thousands are not worth a pudden .
Your neighbours will think ,
When your pocket cries chink .
You are grown plaguy rich on a sudden .
You will be my thankers ,
I 'll make you my bankers ,
As good as Ben Burton or Fade ;[ 2 ]
For nothing shall pass
But my pretty brass ,
And then you 'll be all of a trade .
I 'm a son of a whore
If I have a word more
To say in this wretched condition .
If my coin will not pass ,
I must die like an ass ;
And so I conclude my petition .
<1600>
Quoth the thief to the dog , let me into your door
And I 'll give you these delicate bits .
Quoth the dog , I shall then be more villain than you 're ,
And besides must be out of my wits .
Your delicate bits will not serve me a meal ,
But my master each day gives me bread ;
You 'll fly , when you get what you came here to steal ,
And I must be hang 'd in your stead .
The stockjobber thus from ‘ Change Alley goes down ,
And tips you the freeman a wink ;
Let me have but your vote to serve for the town ,
And here is a guinea to drink .
Says the freeman , your guinea to-night would be spent !
Your offers of bribery cease :
I 'll vote for my landlord to whom I pay rent ,
Or else I may forfeit my lease .
From London they come , silly people to chouse ,
Their lands and their faces unknown :
Who 'd vote a rogue into the parliament-house ,
That would turn a man out of his own ?
<1615>
Poor Monsieur his conscience preserved for a year ,
Yet in one hour he lost it , ‘ tis known far and near ;
To whom did he lose it ?— A judge or a peer .[ 2 ]
Which nobody can deny .
This very same conscience was sold in a closet ,
Nor for a baked loaf , or a loaf in a losset ,
But a sweet sugar-plum , which you put in a posset .
Which nobody can deny .
O Monsieur , to sell it for nothing was nonsense ,
For , if you would sell it , it should have been long since ,
But now you have lost both your cake and your conscience .
Which nobody can deny .
So Nell of the Dairy , before she was wed ,
Refused ten good guineas for her maidenhead ,
Yet gave it for nothing to smooth-spoken Ned .
Which nobody can deny .
But , Monsieur , no vonder dat you vere collogue ,
Since selling de contre be now all de vogue ,
You be but von fool after seventeen rogue .
Which nobody can deny .
Some sell it for profit , ‘ tis very well known ,
And some but for sitting in sight of the throne ,
And other some sell what is none of their own .
Which nobody can deny .
But Philpot , and Corker , and Burrus , and Hayze ,
And Rayner , and Nicholson , challenge our praise ,
With six other worthies as glorious as these .
Which nobody can deny .
There 's Donevan , Hart , and Archer , and Blood ,
And Gibson , and Gerard , all true men and good ,
All lovers of Ireland , and haters of Wood .
Which nobody can deny .
But the slaves that would sell us shall hear o n't in time ,
Their names shall be branded in prose and in rhyme ,
We 'll paint ‘ em in colours as black as their crime .
Which nobody can deny .
But P —— r and copper L —— h we 'll excuse ,
The commands of your betters you dare not refuse ,
Obey was the word when you wore wooden shoes .
Which nobody can deny .
<1623>
I like your collyrium ,
Take my eyes , sir , and clear ye ‘ um ,
‘ Twill gain you a great reputation ;
By this you may rise ,
Like the doctor so wise ,[ 1 ]
Who open 'd the eyes of the nation .
And these , I must tell ye ,
Are bigger than its belly ;—
You know , there ’ s in Livy a story
Of the hands and the feet
Denying of meat ,—
Do n't I write in the dark like a Tory ?
Your water so far goes ,
‘ Twould serve for an Argus ,
Were all his whole hundred sore ;
So many we read
He had in his head ,
Or Ovid 's a son of a whore .
For your recipe , sir ,
May my lids never stir ,
If ever I think once to fee you ;
For I 'd have you to know ,
When abroad I can go ,
That it 's honour enough , if I see you .
<1999>
Abroad in the meadows , to see the young lambs
Run sporting about by the side of their dams ,
With fleeces so clean and so white ;
Or a nest of young doves in a large open cage
When they play all in love , without anger or rage ,
How much may we learn from the sight !
If we had been ducks , we might dabble in mud ;
Or dogs , we might play till it ended in blood :
So foul and so fierce are their natures ;
But Thomas and William , and such pretty names ,
Should be cleanly and harmless as doves or as lambs ,
Those lovely sweet innocent creatures .
Not a thing that we do , nor a word that we say ,
Should injure another in jesting or play ,
For he 's still in earnest that 's hurt :
How rude are the boys that throw pebbles and mire ;
There 's none but a madman will fling about fire ,
And tell you “ ‘ Tis all but in sport ! ”
<2025>
‘ Tis now forty years and dear mother you know it ,
Since my great Uncle[ 1 ]Simkin set up for a poet ,
And I 'll venture to say that not one in the nation ,
From that day to this caus 'd so much admiration ,
But tho ’ I ne'er hope on his humour to hit ,
Much less catch his genius or glow with his wit ,
Or blend with simplicity satire so keen ,
That it laugh 'd away sin , while it laugh 'd away spleen ,
Yet since there are many more folks in our times ,
Than were found about his , who make verses and rhymes ,
I do n't see a reason why I should not try ,
To spread my poor fins and to swim with the fry ,
You know Drewry of Derby would never refuse ,
My sonnets , and stanzas , a place in the news ,
Besides a great name 's a great matter we know ,
James Thompson our schoolmaster always said so ,
And thought it the best of a hundred good reasons ,
Why he should write verses as fine as ‘ The Seasons ’
Now I being last of the Blunderhead race ,
As a casuist this doctrine most warmly embrace ,
And hope my dear mother the parson and you ,
Whilst conning my letters will give me my due ,
And say to reward all my labour and pains ,
He is just like his uncle save wanting his brains .
But a truce to this subject of grave declamation ,
My spirit 's not suited to sage dissertation ,
To anatomists leaving the state of my skull ,
To critics their right of pronouncing me dull ,
I shall merely go on with my gossiping rhyme ,
To tell you my method of killing my time ,
And open as well as I can all the merit ,
This place of resort is allow 'd to inherit . 
When first I arriv 'd here I did n't well know ,
If at Harrogate High , or at Harrogate Low ,
I should place myself snugly , but after some chatter ,
With those who were knowing , I fix 'd on the latter
So now my good madam behold me sat down ,
With a number of invalid folks at the Crown ,
But what way invalid to unfold I 'm not able ,
Unless ‘ tis with cramming at Thackwray 's good table ,
Who with turbot , and ven'son , and poultry , and beef ,
To the sick with their hunger gives instant relief ,
But as to the crop-sick I very much question ,
If here they find help for diseas 'd indigestion ,
The sight of these good things to me was unpleasant ,
For you know I am ticklish and qualmish at present
But the Company laugh and declare I shall soon eat ,
Three pounds of good food , tho ’ I now live on spoonmeat ,
And in order to bring me about very quickly ,
Some good looking dames neither sighing nor sickly ,
Advis 'd me most kindly the very first night ,
To consult with a doctor as soon as ‘ twas light ,
Then take of the water a plentiful dose ,
Said they “ the well 's nigh ” so I find by my nose ,
“ But pray gentle ladies declare in a trice ,
“ The doctor of whom I must ask this advice ? ” 
This question once put t'would surprise you dear mother ,
How they answer 'd at once each more loud than the other ,
“ There 's not one of them all that my fancy so takes ”
“ Cried a lady in black ” “ as my good Doctor Jaques , ”
Says the next “ Mr. Richardson 's wonderful clever ,
Tho ’ so busy dear heart there 's no catching him ever , ”
Cries a third “ if you really want medical skill ,
Mr. Wormald will cure you if any man will , ”
“ And I know ” “ said a fourth ” “ that whatever may ail ye ,
“ You 're sure of relief if you see Doctor Cayley . ”
Afraid of offending each charming adviser ,
By a pref'rence that said “ ma'am your neighbour is wiser , ”
I obey 'd the loud mandate of Gen'ral O'Flurry ,
And this morning consulted with one Doctor Murray
Who sans ruffles , sans wig , and sans avis supercilious ,
Has pronounc 'd on my case and declares I am bilious ,
In my next dearest mother some news I will tell ,
Of these wonderful waters when drank at the well
So wishing you ne'er may have need of such liquor
Conclude me yours truly — with love to the vicar .
<2042>
Ye birds of the Moor , I doubt you 'll be poor ,
The storm is quite likely to last ;
The owl and the crow , are shelter 'd below ,
But you are expos 'd to the blast !
The snow lies so deep , the hill is so steep ,
My footsteps are feeble and slow ,
O lend me your wings , ye dear little things ,
To carry me over the snow !
Nay , I have no gun , so you need not run ,
Nor cackle , nor spread out your tails ;
No danger is near , you 've nothing to fear ,
The poacher is down in the dales .
The wind whistle 's woe , through the valley below ,
To the birds that are down in the wood ;
You may hear by report , that the gun is afloat ,
To scatter their feathers and blood .
If you 'll be content , till the storm shall be spent ,
And suffer no envy or strife ;
No doubt but you may , on some future day ,
Get fat , and escape with your life !
But if you encroach , or chance to approach ,
The web-footed classes domain ;
If wide you should stray , or fall out by the way ,
A thousand to one but you 're slain !
<2050>
Why , why , little bird , so cheerfully sing ,
When all things around look so sad ?
The prospect at present , as touching the spring ,
Gives cause to be sorry , not glad !
Had April appear 'd in loveliest hue ,
And made the green meadows look gay ,
Thou merrily might'st have mounted thy bough ,
And warbled thy minutes away .
But summer 's far off , and still in the copse ,
The cold winter 's snow doth descend ,
Fierce winds , and sharp frosts , may yet blast thy hopes ,
And bring thy sweet song to an end .
By craft of the boys , in bush , or in wood ,
Thy foot may be caught in a snare ,
And thou whilst seeking a morsel of food ,
Be a captive , ere thou art aware .
Why merrily sing , when thou hast no barn ,
In which to lay up thy grain ?
Why warble thy notes , while unthankful man ,
So often is heard to complain ?
Why cheerfully sing when there are no flowers ,
Or sun in the valley to shine ?
‘ Tis proof that thy prospects are brighter than ours ,
Thy heart more contented than mine !
<2051>
The Sun throws his ray on the lake ,
The vessels are scudding along ;
Before half the city 's awake ,
The air is all action and song !
The Bees haste away to the moors ,
And eager their task to complete ,
Extract from the bells of the flowers ,
Their delicate essences sweet .
All cheerful they hurry along ,
Their storehouse of food to increase ,
Till Death puts an end to their song ,
The citizen 's table to grace .
Though few can their weapons withstand ,
Or few can their forces defeat ,
Yet Death with a torch at command ,
Soon makes the wing 'd armies retreat .
At once their anxiety droops ,
In the grave they lie silent and still ,
While strangers are draining the cup ,
They made such exertions to fill .
O may I be bold as the Bee ,
In work of a similar cast ,
So faithful , industrious , and free ,
And labour , and sing to the last !
<2054>
How blessed a thing Hallelujah to sing ,
When time shall with us be no more :—
At the Judge 's right hand all the faithful shall stand ,
His goodness to see and adore !
In that heavenly place in the light of his face ,
They in mansions of glory shall dwell ;
No more the big tear on their face shall appear ,
For to sorrow they 've bid a Farewell !
Above and below rich clusters do grow ,
Of the grapes of that Canaan so pure ;
His welcome so sweet makes the banquet complete ,
And they sing of His mercy secure !
Death vanquish 'd , they sing , and spoil 'd of his sting ,
Of Hell conquer 'd by Christ from above ;
On the plains of delight with thousands in white ,
They shall walk and converse of His love !
But the wicked , alas , when their sentence shall pass ,
Shall at once into darkness be driven ,
Fierce pains to endure with spirits impure ,
Who were hurl 'd from their places in heaven !
Oh , if thou dost crave above all things to have
A seat with thy Saviour divine ,
No longer delay , nor rest night nor day ,
Till a scriptural title is thine !
<2057>
Awake ! O ye sleepers , awake !
Or soon you will smart ‘ neath the rod !
Be thankful you 're not in the lake ,
That burns with the anger of God !
Your life as a vapour will prove ,
Your days as a shadow will flee ;
Then seek to have treasure above ,
And struggle from sin to be free !
O sinners ! be honest and yield
To the Spirit of God when He strives ;
Or you will be slain in the field ,
When He with His army arrives !
This Jesus shall conquer the world !
The proud and the lofty subdue !
With terrible banners unfurl 'd ,
Shall sift both believers and you :—
The poor , not because he is poor ,
Nor the rich for his riches regard ;
But thoroughly purging His floor ,
Appoint unto each his reward !
Believers ! who wish to be whole ;—
A fountain long open hath been ,
To wash out the spots of the soul ,—
O hasten to wash and be clean !
When sin shall experience its death ,
Then you the grand secret shall know ;
Shall Heaven enjoy upon Earth ,
And be happy and useful below !
<2061>
Yes ! once they met with us , and gave us the hand ,
Uniting to sing and to pray ;
But long could not bear the rigid command ,
So off they went lilting away !
Forsaking the vulgar , whom now they despise ,
For doctrines more learned and pure ;—
This cutting off hands , and plucking out eyes ,
This doctrine they could not endure !
They speak of perfection , but oft with disdain ,
Our faults and our failings expose ;
Because this perfection they cannot attain ,
They 'll plead for their muffs and their boas !
So lofty their eyelids , so lofty their looks ,
They 'll laugh at a sinner in tears ;
Their prayers are lock 'd up in their finely bound books ,
While they 're trimming their necks and their ears !
The new birth 's convulsions they cannot have felt ,
Or they dare not speak as they do ;
Their heart is too proud into nothing to melt ,
And must , while to mammon they bow .
Whenever their dwelling you chance to approach ,
Of their soft invitation beware ;
The pharisee 's leaven , the good man 's reproach ,
And the seat of the scorner are there !
To folks of high breeding they offer their pledge ,
‘ Gainst others to raise a complaint ;
They 'll skim on the surface , and trim off the edge ,
To pass for a dignified saint !
The God of Elijah who sees through the heart ,
These specious impostors will spurn ,
And send them in spite of their cunning and art ,
Where they will eternally mourn !
<2065>
O Fryup ! far distant thy fame now extends ,
Kind Heav'n doth thy breaches repair ;
Thou land of religion , and bibles , and friends ,
I rejoice to breathe thy pure air !
Thou land of devotion , and health to the soul ,
With pleasure I walk o'er thy plains ;
Where Christ to the sick hath oft spoken , “ Be whole ! ”
Where religion , where righteousness reigns !
With earnest desire I 've long wish 'd to see ,
The beauties which now I behold ;
This visit has proved more refreshing to me ,
Than thousands of silver , or gold !
The day spring of glory hath visited thee ,
For joy thy inhabitant sings ;
The bright Sun of Righteousness riseth on thee ,
And healing 's receiv 'd from his wings !
His influence too , I have felt in my soul ,
With gratitude now I confess ;
May all his opposers yield to his control ,
And sinners be saved by his grace !
As lights in a land long benighted and dark ,
May thy sons and thy daughters arise ;
While faith to a flame fans the Heav'nly spark ,
And they earnestly press to the skies !
May the husband incessantly plead for the wife ,
The wife for her husband contend ;
That the favour of God which is better than life ,
May on both through the Spirit descend !
May the lover 's petition be heard for the fair ,
And the maiden prevail for the youth ;
Till all those who for righteousness never did care ,
Feel the force of Religion and Truth !
May thy ministers fill 'd with the Spirit of God ,
As giants prevail o'er their foes ;
Their word prove more sharp than a two edged sword ,
In defence of their King and his laws !
May thy sinners be sav 'd on every hand ,
Believers be steadfast and true ;—
With sorrow , once more , I now quit thy fair land ,
Old Fryup ! and bid thee adieu !
<2070>
The sun had gone down o'er yon lofty mountain ,
The last golden streamer had left the tall tree ;
The dwelling below seemed forsaken and gloomy ,
Its inmates were tossing upon the wide sea .
The rose tree was nodding the lasses had nourish 'd ,
Which oft had supplied them with Sunday 's perfume ;
The wall-flower in sorrowful modesty flourish 'd ,
And wept o'er the beautiful daisy in bloom !
In the track by the river the green grass is springing ,
On whose flowery bank they were oft wont to stray ;
No more the still grove with sweet echoes is ringing ,
To the voice of the milk maid , or children at play .
The dog in the night time now howls discontented ,
Of its master and mistress but lately bereft ;
I listen 'd and look 'd to the place they frequented ,
Of them not a sigh , nor a whisper is left .
How strong the emotions of friendship were glowing ,
When towed by the steamer the ocean they braved ;
Their force was evinced by the tears that were flowing ,
As the hat , or the hand , or the handkerchief waved .
From the shores of old England we anxiously view 'd them ,
A cargo most precious , and dear to our sight ;
Far o'er the blue surface affection pursued them ,
Till the ship was conceal 'd by the curtain of night .
They have left us ,— their absence wakes mournful reflection ,
As the fast sailing Arundel bears them away ;
We can only consign them to heavenly protection ,
To Him , whom the winds and the waters obey .
He who roves through the wood may quickly discover ,
Their affection in tokens which there he will see ;
Where with sorrowful heart each friend or each lover ,
May sigh o'er their names in the bark of the tree .
<2090>
Your pardon , my friend ,
If my rhymes did offend ,
Your pardon , a thousand times o'er ;
From friendship I strove ,
Your pangs to remove ,
But , I swear , I will do so no more .
Since your beautiful maid ,
Your flame has repaid ,
No more I your folly regret ;
She 's now most divine ,
And I bow at the shrine ,
Of this quickly reformèd coquette .
Yet still , I must own , [ i ]
I should never have known ,
From your verses , what else she deserv 'd ;
Your pain seem 'd so great ,
I pitied your fate ,
As your fair was so dev'lish reserv 'd .
Since the balm-breathing kiss [ ii ]
Of this magical Miss ,
Can such wonderful transports produce ; [ iii ]
Since the “ world you forget ,
When your lips once have met , ”
My counsel will get but abuse .
You say , “ When I rove , ”
“ I know nothing of love ; ”
Tis true , I am given to range ;
If I rightly remember ,
I 've lov 'd a good number ; [ iv ]
Yet there 's pleasure , at least , in a change .
I will not advance , [ v ]
By the rules of romance ,
To humour a whimsical fair ;
Though a smile may delight ,
Yet a frown will affright , [ vi ]
Or drive me to dreadful despair .
While my blood is thus warm ,
I ne'er shall reform ,
To mix in the Platonists ’ school ;
Of this I am sure ,
Was my Passion so pure ,
Thy Mistress would think me a fool . [ vii ]
And if I should shun ,
Every woman for one ,
Whose image must fill my whole breast ;
Whom I must prefer ,
And sigh but for her ,
What an insult ‘ twould be to the rest !
Now Strephon , good-bye ;
I cannot deny ,
Your passion appears most absurd ;
Such love as you plead ,
Is pure love , indeed ,
For it only consists in the word .
<2098>
When I dream that you love me , you 'll surely forgive ;
Extend not your anger to sleep ;
For in visions alone your affection can live ,—
I rise , and it leaves me to weep .
Then , Morpheus ! envelop my faculties fast ,
Shed o'er me your languor benign ;
Should the dream of to-night but resemble the last ,
What rapture celestial is mine !
They tell us that slumber , the sister of death ,
Mortality 's emblem is given ;
To fate how I long to resign my frail breath ,
If this be a foretaste of Heaven !
Ah ! frown not , sweet Lady , unbend your soft brow ,
Nor deem me too happy in this ;
If I sin in my dream , I atone for it now ,
Thus doom 'd , but to gaze upon bliss .
Though in visions , sweet Lady , perhaps you may smile ,
Oh ! think not my penance deficient !
When dreams of your presence my slumbers beguile ,
To awake , will be torture sufficient .
<2156>
There was an old woman who lived in a shoe ,
Who had so many children she didn ’ t know what to do ;
She gave them some broth without any bread ,
And whipt them all soundly and sent them to bed .
<2164>
Three wise men of Gotham
Went to sea in a bowl .
If the bowl had been stronger ,
My song had been longer .
<2190>
His shop is a grocer 's — a snug , genteel place ,
Near the corner of Oak-street and Pearl ;
He can dress , dance , and bow to the ladies with grace
And ties his cravat with a curl .
He 's ask 'd to all parties — north , south , east , and west ,
That take place between Chatham and Cherry ,
And when he 's been absent full oft has the “ best
Society ” ceased to be merry .
And nothing has darken 'd a sky so serene ,
Nor disorder 'd his beauship 's Elysium ,
Till this season among our elite there has been
What is call 'd by the clergy “ a schism . ”
‘ Tis all about eating and drinking — one set
Gives sponge-cake , a few “ kisses ” or so ,
And is cool 'd after dancing with classic sherbet ,
“ Sublimed ” ( see Lord Byron ) “ with snow . ”
Another insists upon punch and perdrix ,
Lobster-salad , Champagne , and , by way
Of a novelty only , those pearls of our sea ,
Stew 'd oysters from Lynn-Haven bay .
Miss Flounce , the young milliner , blue-eyed and bright ,
In the front parlour over her shop ,
“ Entertains , ” as the phrase is , a party to-night ,
Upon peanuts and ginger-pop .
And Miss Fleece , who 's a hosier , and not quite as young ,
But is wealthier far than Miss Flounce ,
She “ entertains ” also to-night with cold tongue ,
Smoked herring , and cherry-bounce .
In praise of cold water the Theban bard spoke ,
He of Teos sang sweetly of wine ;
Miss Flounce is a Pindar in cashmere and cloak ,
Miss Fleece an Anacreon divine .
The Montagues carry the day in Swamp Place ;
In Pike-street the Capulets reign ;
A limonadiere is the badge of one race ,
Of the other a flask of Champagne .
Now as each the same evening her soiree announces ,
What better , he asks , can be done ,
Than drink water from eight until ten with the Flounces ,
And then wine with the Fleeces till one !
<2298>
O cast thou the dice !
Make me rich in a trice ,
Let me win in good season !
Things are badly controlled ,
And had I but gold ,
So had I my reason .
<2300>
What means the sieve ?
Wert thou the thief ,
I 'd know him and shame him .
Look through the sieve !
Know'st thou the thief ,
And darest not name him ?
<2302>
O be thou so good
With sweat and with blood
The crown to belime !
‘ Tis done , let it be !
We speak and we see ,
We hear and we rhyme !
<END>
